1 i The Bell of Atri

This is a drawing of a famous bell called the Liberty Bell. Liberty
means freedom. This bell is over 250 years old. Located in
Pennsylvania, USA, this bell is a symbol of American independence.
Mark the path for the children to reach the Liberty Bell.

Now let us read a story about another old bell—the bell in the town of Atri in Italy.

Long, long ago, in Italy, there ruled a king named John. King John was well known for

his goodness and wisdom’. One day, the king and his ministers came to a small town

called Atri.

When King John reached the town square’, he announced’, ‘By my royal order, a great
bell shall hang here. Whenever something wrong is done to a person, he or she shall

ring the bell and the town judge shall correct whatever wrong has been done.

‘wisdom: the state of knowing and understanding a lot about many things town square: an open space in
the middle of a town used for gatherings ?announced: told a lot of people about something important

(

So a great big bell was hung in the town square. The people of Atri rang the bell
each time someone did something wrong to them. When
somebody stole the farmer's sheep, the farmer rang the bell.
When someone ate Grandmother's special fruit pie without her examples of
permission’, she rang the bell. When a bully teased a child, the when the bell
child rang the bell. In each and every case, the town judge came yas rung.

and corrected the person who had done wrong,

After a while, whenever
people thought of doing
something wrong, they
would think of the sound

of the bell and change their
mind. So the bell rang less
and less. The bell rusted*® and

the rope became ragged®.

The townspeople almost
forgot about the bell but the
judge did not. He called one
of the town workers and
said, ‘Please go out into the
woods and get a long vine’.
We will tie the vine to the
bell so that it can be rung

once again:

At this time in Atri, there lived a soldier. He had been a How do you think

good soldier, and tales of his bravery and adventures were people can get rusty?

still told. Yet, as you know, people, just like bells, grow rusty How do you think
you would get rusty if

. i, . you did not use magic
day long he just sat and counted his piles of gold coins. words like please,

The soldier had an old faithful® horse. The soldier and his

horse had shared many adventures but now the soldier

when they are not used! ‘The soldier had grown lazy—all

thank you and sorry?

‘permission: allowing somebody to do something ‘rusted: become covered with a reddish brown

substance that is sometimes seen oniron ‘ragged: oldandtorn vine: a plant that grapes grow on
Fo" loyal; ready to help friends and fulfil promises
12
did not take good care of the horse. The poor horse looked thin and sad.“Why should
I feed this old horse?’ the old soldier thought.‘I hardly ever ride him anymore, so why
should I have to feed him all the time?’

One afternoon, looking for something to eat, the sad old horse wandered? into the
town of Atri. But food was hard to find. The dogs of the town barked at him. The
people of the town had shut their doors and windows to keep the heat out.

Then the hungry horse spotted the green vine that hung
from the bell. The horse hurried to the bell. Now horses do
not know about such things as the ringing of bells and the

Why were there
no people on the
streets?

The hungry old
horse grabbed the vine that was tied to
the bell. The vine had been tied to the end
of the bell’s old, ragged rope rather tightly
and the horse could not pull it loose. The
horse pulled and pulled, and the bell rang

and rang.

The bell rang so loudly and for so long
that all the people of Atri awoke from
their summer naps”®. They came out into
the streets, wondering why the bell was
being rung. They found the poor, hungry
horse munching” on the vine, The judge

knew that the horse belonged to the
soldier and he called him.

The soldier came to the town square.‘Shame on you for
not looking after your faithful horse!’ said the judge.‘T
order you to take care of him! Give him plenty of oats, a

How do you think the
judge spoke to the
soldier: strictly, kindly \
or jokingly?

warm stable’ and a green field to graze” in’
|

*wandered: walked slowly with no plan “naps: short sleep taken during the day ''munching: biting and
eating something noisily ‘stable: a building for horses to live in “graze: eat grass
From that day on, the soldier took good care of his old horse, and the people of the
town never forgot the good that the bell could bring.

(adapted from an Italian folktale)

Making connections

Quick answers
1, Fill in the story map given below.

Characters (List of people and animals in the story):

2. Choose the right answer.
a. King John gave an order for a bell in Atri because
i. Atri was a small town.
ii. the people of Atri wanted a bell.
iii. he wanted to help the people.
b, The people of Atri almost forgot the bell because
i. the bell rusted and the rope became ragged.
ii. the people of Atri hardly rang the bell any more.

CIO WL

iii. King John went away.
c. The judge asked a town worker to tie a vine to the bell because
i he thought someone might need to ring the bell.
ii, he knew a hungry horse would eat it.
iii. the worker did not have much to do.
d, The horse grabbed and pulled the vine because
i. he wanted to ring the bell.
ii, he was so hungry he wanted to eat it.

CI LL

iii. he wanted the judge to help him.

Reference to context
3. Long, long ago, in Italy, there ruled a king named John. King John was well known for his

goodness and wisdom. One day the king and his ministers came to a small town called Atri.

a. What was King John well known for?
b. Which word is the opposite of foolishness?
c. What did the king order for the town of Atri?
4, One afternoon, looking for something to eat, the sad old horse wandered into
the town of Atri.
a. Whose horse was this?

b. Which two words describe the horse?
c. Why was the horse looking for something to eat?

Read, reflect and write

5. Why did the bell of Atri ring less and less?

6. Why did the soldier stop feeding his horse?

7. How did the judge correct the wrong done by the soldier to his horse?
8. What are the good qualities that you think the judge had?
Word wall

Words in a word

1. How many words can you make out of the letters in the word MINISTERS?
Here are some picture clues for you.

Professional people

2. Choose words from the box to complete the speech bubbles. One has been done
for you.

i ™
| correct people who
“| do something wrong. |
am a judge...
‘ee #
a “\,

| make statues. |ama

Every night | look at
the moon, the planets
and the stars. | am an

J

r

‘ \fapipe oratap _
leaks, call me. | am

We perform in
a circus. We are

\ / We play ina ;
band. We are \
NM

.
Icollect moneyata = =
store or supermarket. | sy
AN A eesssssssessssseessesseessseee .

Grammar time

Nouns: concrete and abstract

Read these sentences.
King John came to a small town called Atri. Names of people
The soldier had an old horse. places, animals and
A great bell shall hang here. things are called

naming words or
The words King John, town, Atri, soldier, horse and bell are nouns. nouns. Ideas and
qualities are also
nouns.

They name people, places, animals and things.

Read these sentences.
King John was well known for his goodness and wisdom.
Someone ate Grandmother's special fruit pie without her permission.
Tales of the soldier's bravery were told.
The townsfolk looked at the horse in amazement.

The words goodness, wisdom, permission, bravery and amazement are also nouns.
‘They name qualities, ideas and feelings.
Nouns can be concrete or abstract.

Sym

Concrete nouns are names of people, places, animals
and things. They are sense nouns. You can see, hear,

Abstract nouns are qualities, ideas and feelings. You
cannot see, hear, smell, taste and/or touch them.

} We can see a
beautiful tree and a
beautiful butterfly.
But we cannot see
beauty.
_—

smell, taste and/or touch them.

1. Look at the table below. We can see a cake. We can smell it, taste it and touch it. It is
a concrete noun. We cannot see, hear, smell, taste or touch sadness. It is an abstract
noun. Now fill in the table.

See Hear Smell/ Taste Touch Type of Noun
Concrete or
Noun a ) Li a> Abstract?
cake J x v Jv concrete
sadness x x x x abstract
idea
crayons
rain
fear
joy

mango

2. Choose abstract nouns from the box to match the concrete nouns given in the word
webs. You may choose the words that you think fit the concrete nouns the best.

wisdom courage

peace

3. Use any five abstract nouns from the box in sentences of your own.

goodness helpfulness bravery brilliance amazement
imagination opportunity determination relaxation

Pronunciation @
Syllable

Every word is made from at least one syllable. The sound of a vowel is called a syllable.

Some words have only one syllable or vowel sound.

fan met hid dog bun
king meet heat poor bell

Some words have two syllables or vowel sounds.

wis/dom sum/mer peo/ple bul/ly ta/ble

Some words have more than two syllables or vowel sounds.

per/mis/sion grand/mo/ther mi/nis/ter
in/telfli/gence _ pro/fes/sion

Listen to your teacher read these words aloud. Then, repeat the sounds.

mo/ther al/so sis/ter rus/ty cor/rec/ted
he/li/cop/ter ro/yal faith/ful a/woke ka/lei/do/scope
in/de/pen/dent mun/ching ad/ven/ture affter/noon __in/for/ma/tion

Write well

How should friends behave with each other? Use this graphic organizer to think of
ideas and then write a paragraph.

are sharef/help play make me feel
fun, . -share.lunch.boxes . . together. . _ happy.
Listen and speak well @

1. Listen to a short description of these horses. Then match the horses to their names.

a.

2. In groups of three, take turns in describing these flowers to one another. As one
person describes the flower, the other two must guess which picture it is. Do not
mention the colours in the description.

2%

