2 i The Magic Powder

1. Make a list of things you will need if you want to make a sandwich.

Two slices of bread © a vvssssssssesssvssvssvesssessessvsessessesseseseesensencetees a

2. Unscramble these letters to find out what we call each item on such
a list.

NGERIIDNTE — aceecesssntneestenensesenesstneeneentneest

Now let us read a story about a young man who tried to make gold and of the
magic ingredient! an old man told him about.

Once upon a time, in a little village on the banks of the Irrawaddy River’, there lived
a young woman called Zeya. She was happily married to a good man named Thiri,
but there was one problem that nagged* Zeya—her husband believed that he was an

alchemist. Like other alchemists he believed he could make gold. All
day he kept dreaming about ways to change mud into gold.

t : :
Who is an
Soon their money had run out, and Zeya had to struggle to buy alchemist?
food for the two of them. “You should find a job soon, she pleaded

with Thiri.’We cannot continue like this!’

But Thiri would not listen.“No, Zeya, I’m on the verge* of a breakthrough?! We will
soon be able to turn all the dirt we find into gold!’

‘ingredient: one of the things that you add when you are making something to eat "Irrawaddy River: a
river in the country of Myanmar *nagged: worried ‘verge: very near to the moment when something
happens ‘breakthrough: something achieved after hard work

26
Disheartened®, Zeya approached her father, wise old Win, for a solution. He thought
for a while and asked to see Thiri.

The next day, Thiri arrived at
his father-in-law’s house. He
was taken by surprise when
his father-in-law took him
aside and whispered,“When I
was young like you, I was an
alchemist too!’

‘The two of them spent the
whole afternoon discussing
Thiri's work. Finally

the old man said, “Thiri,
congratulations! You are
definitely on the verge of a
breakthrough. But you seem
to be lacking a very important
ingredient in your experiments.
Only recently did I discover
this, but I am too old for this
task. It requires enormous
effort ...:

“Then let me do it for you, Father!’ cried Thiri. He was really excited. “Tell me what the
ingredient is!’

Win leaned closer and whispered, ‘Son, the secret ingredient
is a silver powder that is only found on banana leaves. You What was the secret
ingredient that Win

told Thiri about?
spells’ on them. Then, as the plants grow, the powder on the |) what were the

will have to plant the banana trees yourself and cast certain

leaves will gain magical powers. two conditions that
; ; ; , Thiri would have to
How much of this powder will we need, Father?’ asked observe?

Thiri excitedly.
A kilo, replied Win.

‘disheartened: having lost hope cast certain spells: use magic words
A kilo! cried Thiri, “That will require hundreds of banana plants! But I shall do it!’
Later that evening, the old man taught his son-in-law the magic spells and loaned him
the money to start the work.

‘The very next day, Thiri bought a field near his house and cleared it. Then he planted
banana saplings’, after carefully chanting® the magic spells. He worked in the field,
watered his plants, pulled weeds’ out and kept pests’? away. When the plants grew and
bore fruit, he carefully collected the silver powder from the leaves.

‘There was hardly any powder on each leaf, so Thiri had to
How did Thiri buy more land and grow more bananas. He was determined
care for the to do what was needed. It took him several years, but at the
banana plants? end of it all, he had managed to collect enough of the magic
powder. He rushed to his father-in-law.

‘Father, finally ... here is a kilo of the magic powder" he cried.

“Wonderful! said Win.‘I am proud of you, Thiri. Now I will show you how to turn dirt
into gold. But first let us get Zeya. We need her help:

Without losing any time, Thiri ran to his wife and was soon back with her.’Zeya, asked
the old man, ‘what did you do with the bananas when Thiri was collecting the powder”
“Why, I sold them, Father, replied Zeya.
“That's how we earned a living. I saved
some money too. I have it safely at
home:

‘The three of them went to Thiri’s house
where Zeya brought out a bag that

she had kept safely in the loft’’. Win
emptied the bag on the table. Gold
coins tinkled” as they fell in a huge
shiny heap. Then he went to the field
and came back with a handful of dirt
which he placed next to the heap of
gold.

7saplings: young trees *chanting: saying a word or group of words many times loudly
°weeds: wild plants that grow where they are not wanted pests: insects or animals that damage

plants loft: the room or space under the roof of the house “tinkled: made light ringing sounds
“You see, Thiri; he said, turning to his son-in-law, ‘you have changed dirt into gold!’

Never after that day did Thiri collect any more magic powder from the leaves, but he
continued to grow bananas. His alchemist father-in-law had taught him the best way to
turn dirt into gold!

(a folktale from Myanmar)

Making connections

Quick answers

1. Complete the following sentences.

a. Zeya and Thiri lived in

b. Thiri did not stop his experiments when Zeya asked him to because he

thought

c. Zeyas father was

d. Zeyas father asked Thiri to

2. Match the columns.

A B
a. Thiri wanted to solution to Zeya’ problem.
b. Zeya was worried as Win loaned him some money.
c. Old Win provided a collect the silver powder.
d. Thiri was able to buy a field Thiri spent all day dreaming
because while they had no money.
e. It took Thiri several years to turn dirt into gold.

Reference to context

3. Soon all their money had run out, and Zeya had to struggle to buy food for the two of
them. ‘You should find a job soon, she pleaded with Thiri. “We cannot continue like this!’
a. Why did Thiri not have a job?
b. Find words in the lines above that mean:
i. tried very hard to do something that is not easy
ii, asked for something with strong feeling
c. Did Thiri listen to her? Whom did Zeya then turn to for help?
4. Then he went to the field and came back with a handful of dirt which he placed next
to the heap of gold. “You see, Thiri, he said,

turning to his son-in-law, ‘you have changed

dirt into gold!’

a. Who went to the field? What did he
bring back?

b. Find the opposites of the following
words/phrases:
i. came back ii. turning to

c. What did Thiri realize when his father-
in-law told him that he had changed
dirt into gold?

Read, reflect and write

5. What task did Win set Thiri to do? What reason did he give for not being able to
do it himself?

6, At the end of the story, Win is called an alchemist. Do you think it is a fitting title
for him? Give reasons for your answer.

7. Give two words each to describe Win, Thiri and Zeya.

8, In this story Win teaches Thiri a lesson. What do we, the readers, learn from this?

Word wall

Sound words

-g
name to these words—
onomatopoeia.

Some words imitate the sounds of objects or actions. .
Can you say it out loud?

Example: Gold coins tinkled as they fell in a huge
shiny heap.

Tinkle describes the sound that the coins make as they fall.
Here is an illustration of some sounds that you usually hear in the classroom.

Classroom sounds

eB] ©

the banging of a desk

the ticking of a clock

the rustling of pages

the shuffling of feet

Now think of the sounds that you would hear in a jungle and fill up the following web.

|

Grammar time

Definite article: the
Read these sentences.

Thiri bought a field near his house. He worked in the field. f
Zeya brought out a bag that she had kept safely in the loft. |=

Articles are
words that go
before nouns.

Win emptied the bag on the table.
When we say a field, we mean any field near Thiri’s house.
The field shows a specific or definite field—the one that Thiri had bought.
We say a bag when the bag is mentioned for the first time. When the noun bag is
repeated, we use the before it.

A, an and the are articles. _

We use a and an when we do not refer to someone or something
specific. That is why we call a/an indefinite articles.

We use the when we want to refer to someone or something specific or
definite. That is why the is called the definite article.

1. Fillin a, an or the in the blanks in the short story given below.

There was once «4... flock of birds peacefully

pecking at seeds under tree. old
We also use the to

hunter came along and threw «1... heavy net over show that someone or
something is special

them. or one of akind: the
fy. . , rincipal of our school
He said, Aha! Now I have my dinner! principal of !
the sun, the moon and
All at once «14... birds began to flap their wings. the air.
Up, up they rose into «sess air, taking sss net

with them. They came down on... apple tree nearby, and as +. NEt got
caught in ss trees branches, .....00 birds flew out from under it, to freedom.
vesereeeeee HUNter looked on in wonder, scratched his head and muttered, As long as
those birds work together with one another like that, I'll never be able to capture

them! Each one of those birds is so weak, yet, together they can lift ........... net:
Geographical uses of the

Read this sentence.

Once upon a time, in a little village on the banks of the Irrawaddy river, there lived a

young woman called Zeya.

We use the before the names of rivers. Let us learn more about the geographical uses of

the. We use the before the names of the following:

Ocean, the Arabian Sea Suez Canal

Oceans and seas: the Atlantic Rivers and canals: the Nile, the

but not before the names of

Groups of lakes: the Great Lakes;

lakes: Lake Superior, Chilika Lake

Deserts: the Sahara, the Gobi

Mountain ranges: the Alls, the Urals;
but not before the names of mountains:
Mt Everest, Mt Kanchenjunga

Groups of islands: the Andaman

Islands, the West Indies;

but not before names of islands:
_ Greenland

Points on the globe: the Equator,
the North Pole

We do not use the before:

We usually
pronounce the with
a short sound like
thuh. But when the
comes before a
vowel sound, we

Names of continents: Asia, Africa, | Names of countries: India, Nepal,

Australia Sri Lanka pronounce it as a
But we do say: the Netherlands, long thee.
the USA, the UK, the Philippines Practise saying: the
and the West Indies antelope, the earth,

the umbrella, the
onion, the inkpad.

How would you say:
the unicorn?

PATNA

PRILOMETAES
Names of cities, towns or states: Names of streets:
Mumbai, Madwa, Mizoram Park Lane, Oxford Street

2. Put a tick against the sentences in which the use of articles is correct.

a. Hillary and Tenzing climbed the Mt Everest.
b, Kanchenjunga is a mountain in the Himalayas.
c. The Asia is the largest continent.

d. There are very few trees in the Sahara Desert.
e. The Nile is the longest river in the world.

CWI

Punctuation

Comma

We use commas to separate words or word groups ina series (three or more things).

Read this sentence.
He worked in the field, watered his plants, pulled weeds out and kept pests away.
This avoids confusion when we read and also helps us pause at the right moments and
places while reading long sentences.

We also use commas before or surrounding the name or title of a person directly

addressed.

Read these sentences.
‘No, Zeya, I’m on the verge of a breakthrough!’
‘Father, finally ... here is a kilo of magic powder! he cried.
‘Tam proud of you, Thiri’

Thiri is so excited that he is speaking without pausing at the right places. Insert commas
to help Win and Zeya understand Thiri better.

| Yes Father | realize how much time | wasted on my useless

— experiments. Zeya we will buy another field with the money you

have collected. We will plant banana mango cherry and papaya

saplings. You have been a kind patient and hardworking wife

Zeya. You Father are the wisest man | know. | shall work hard to
earn gold instead of dreaming of ways to make it.

Write well

1. Write a paragraph on the uses of bananas. A fact file has been provided to help you.

Fact file
food products: jam, toffee, milkshake, chips
animal food: eaten by monkeys, cows, birds
banana fibre: bags, carpets, ropes, paper
banana leaves: to serve food on
medicinal properties: vitamins and minerals, energy,
rubbing a slice soothes itch caused by mosquito bites

Here are a few words that you can use in your paragraph.

2. Give a title to your paragraph.

Listen and speak well @

1. Zeya and Thiri decided to go on a trip. Listen carefully to their travel plans and mark
the route that they followed during their trip.

Mumbai

ARABIAN
SEA

2. Imagine you are Zeya. With the help of the map, describe your trip to Win.
3. In pairs, plan how you will give directions to a tourist visiting your hometown. The
direction should be from your school to a famous landmark in your hometown.

Share the directions with other pairs in the class. Compare the directions. Which
Po pair gave the most precise directions?
36
