3 | enry

There are a lot of stories about animals. Have you read any of these
stories? Given below are pictures of some famous animal characters. a
Match them to their stories/descriptions.

~ “\
Black Beauty was created by author Anna Sewell.
Black Beauty is loyal, and helps his owner and

\_ friend to earn money by pulling carriages.

-

Baloo was created by author Rudyard Kipling, He :
loves having fun. He loves singing and dancing.
But he is also very brave. He is a good teacher and
helps out his friends in times of need. He is very
_ good friends with a young boy.

_

(Peter was created by author Beatrix Potter. Peter is )
naughty. He doesnt listen to his mother and gets
into trouble all the time. He enters farms without

\ Permission to eat carrots and radishes.

 \,

( Stuart Little was created by author E.B, White.
Stuart got adopted by the Little family as their
second son. Stuart is small and because of that gets
into a lot of trouble. His family loves him as much

as he loves them but the house cat is not very fond

\_ of him. )

5. i 2g a ~~,

Winnie was created by author A. A. Milne. Winnie
is a very good friend. He loves his friends as much

as he loves honey. He is very soft-spoken.
N A

Let us read a story about a chameleon! named Henry.

This is the story of Henry, our pet chameleon. Chameleons are no ordinary reptiles.
They are easily distinguished” by certain outstanding’ marks from their nearest
relatives, the lizards.

A chameleon’s tongue is as long as its body. On its head is a rigid* crest® which looks
like a fireman's helmet. Its limbs are long and slender‘, and its fingers and toes are more
developed than those of other reptiles. Many people believe that the chameleon is a
dangerous and poisonous reptile.

When Grandfather was visiting a friend,
he came upon a noisy scene at the garden
gate. Men were shouting, hurling’ stones
and brandishing? sticks. The cause of

all this was a chameleon who had been
discovered sunning himself on a shrub.
The gardener declared that it was a thing
capable of poisoning people at a distance
of twenty feet and as a result the entire
household had risen in arms’.

Grandfather was in time to save the

chameleon from certain death and
brought the little reptile home. That

chameleon was Henry and that was how he came to live with us.

Henry was a harmless creature. Provided I was patient”,

Henry was willing to take food from my hands. This he did Which word in
this paragraph is
the antonym or
opposite of slowly?

very swiftly. His tongue was the sort which came back to
him with the food, an insect, attached to it. Before I could
realize what had happened, the grasshopper held between
my fingers would be lodged" between Henry's jaws.

‘chameleon (pronounced as ka-mee-liun): a lizard-like creature with large eyes and a long tail that

can change its colour ?distinguished: (here) seen as different from others outstanding: very

important ‘rigid: hard and not easy to bend or move ‘crest: skin on top of a bird or animal's

head ‘slender: thin “hurling: throwing something with alot of strength *brandishing: shaking or waving
something risen in arms: were angry and protesting about something ‘patient: to do something ina
careful way for a long time, without hurrying “lodged: fixed or stuck

38
Henry did not cause trouble in our house, but he did create something like a riot’? in
the nursery school down the road. It happened like this.

When the papayas in our garden were ripe, Grandmother usually sent a basket of
them to her friend, Mrs Ghosh, who was the principal of the nursery school. On this
occasion, Henry managed to smuggle” himself into the basket of papayas when no one

was looking. The gardener dutifully” carried the papayas across to the school and took
them in to Mrs Ghosh’s office.

When Mrs Ghosh came in
after making her rounds,
she began admiring and
examining the papayas. Out

popped Henry!

Mrs Ghosh screamed. Henry
would probably have liked

to blush a deep red, but he
turned a bright green instead,
as that was the colour of the

papayas.

Mts Ghosh’s assistant, Miss

Daniels, rushed in, took one

look at the chameleon and joined in the screaming. Henry took fright and fled from the
office, running down the corridor and into one of the classrooms.

There he climbed on to a desk, while the children ran in all directions, some to get
away from Henry, some to catch him. But Henry made his exit through a window and
disappeared into the garden.

Grandmother heard all about the incident from Mrs Ghosh, but did not tell her that
the chameleon was ours. I did not think Henry would find his way back to us, because
the school was three houses away. But three days later, I found him sunning himself on
the garden wall and he readily accepted some food from my hand.

(adapted and abridged)

"riot: a situation in which a group of people make a lot of noise and trouble "smuggle: move things

secret utifully: to do something that is expected trom you incident: something that happens -
ly “dutifully: tod hing th xpected from y Sincid hing that happ *
uskin Bond (b. 1934) was born in Kasauli in Himachal Pradesh, India.
Ri has written many poems and stories for children. Here is what
he said in a recent interview: ‘I'm shy. But it is easier to interact with
children. Just the other day, a boy said he wanted to become a writer but
couldn't manage to fill even a single page. | said, “Write one sentence,

nu

later another; go on adding; you'll find the page full!

Making connections

Quick answers

1. The story tells us some interesting facts about chameleons. Fill in the table to show
the similarities and differences between house lizards and chameleons.

House lizard Similarities Chameleon

2. Put a tick (W) against the sentences that are true and a cross (X) against those that
are false.

a. The chameleon is not a poisonous reptile.

b. The gardener knew a lot about chameleons.

c. Henry created no trouble at all.
d. Henry got into the basket to frighten Mrs Ghosh.

e. Miss Daniels rushed into the room on hearing the principal scream.

Reference to context

3. Grandfather was in time to save the chameleon from certain death and brought the little
reptile home.
a. Where was the chameleon?
b. What does the author tell us to show that the chameleon was harmless?

Bs
c. Grandfather saved the reptile and brought him home. What does this tell us
about the author's grandfather?

4. Mrs Ghosh screamed. Henry would probably have liked to blush a deep red, but he
turned a bright green instead, as that was the colour of the papayas. Mrs Ghoshs
assistant, Miss Daniels, rushed in, took one look at the chameleon and joined in the
screaming.

a. Why did Mrs Ghosh scream?

b. Why do you think Henry turned a bright green?

c. Which word in the given lines means someone whose
duty is to help?

d. What did Henry do when Miss Daniels started

screaming?

Read, reflect and write

5. What danger did Grandfather save Henry from?

6. When the children saw Henry, they ran in all directions. Why did they do this?
What would you have done if you were in the classroom?

7. What do we learn about the writer's feelings for animals from this story? Do you
share these feelings? Give reasons for your answer.

Word wall

Animals

1. One animal is the odd one out in each of these groups. Circle the animal that does
not fit in. Use a dictionary if you need to. One has been done for you.

. chameleon, lizard, crocodile, sparrow)

. wasp, butterfly, earthworm, bee
Sparrow is the only

bird in the group.

a
b

c. ladybird, crow, pigeon, parrot,

d. frog, crocodile, giraffe, hippopotamus
e

. shark, octopus, dolphin, goldfish
Animal groups

2. The table given below has some collective nouns that we use for groups of animals.
Match the animals to their group names. One has been done for you.

A B
a. acamouflage of oxen
b. ateam of fish
c. acolony of cattle
d. aschool of chameleons
e. aherd of rats
f. apack of penguins

Grammar time

Revision of tenses
Verbs are action words.

Chameleons change colour. We run.

Verbs change forms.

Mental actions are also
verbs.

We guessed the

Read these sentences. answer.

The chameleon changes colour. Some verbs describe the

The chameleon changed colour. way things are.

The chameleon is changing colour. They are happy.

The chameleon was changing colout.

The chameleon will change colour.

In each of these sentences the verb change is in a different form or tense.
A verb shows the time of an action by changing its form.

Tenses are the forms that verbs take to show the time
of actions.

The helping verb )

be: am, is, are, was,
were

Read this table to revise tenses and time.

Tenses and Time

Used for

Examples

Simple Present

Everyday actions and routines
Something that is always true

| go to school by bus.
The sun rises in the east.

Simple Past

Actions that happened earlier

| went to the library yesterday.

Present Continuous

An action that is happening at
the time of speaking

We are learning about tenses
and time.

Past Continuous

An action that was happening
at some time in the past.

We were painting sunflowers
in the art class yesterday.

Simple Future

An action that has not yet
happened.

It’s cold. | will wear a coat.
lam going to visit my
grandmother on Sunday.

1. Complete the table given below.

Simple
Present

Simple Past

is/am/are + verb-ing

Present Continuous

Past Continuous
was/were + verb-ing

| walk to
school.

Kevi drew a picture.

We are reading.

They were eating dinner.

Sentences can be positive or negative. Negative sentences are those that say not.

Let us read a few examples of positive and negative sentences.

Positive Sentences

Simple Present: do/does not

Negative sentences

+ verb

| like chameleons.

| do not like chameleons.

He likes chameleons.
We like chameleons.

He does not like chameleons.
We do not like chameleons.

Simple Past: did not + verb

| screamed. | did not scream.
Mrs Ghosh screamed. Mrs Ghosh did not scream.
They screamed. They did not scream.

2.

Present continuous: am/is/are not + verb

lam looking for Henry. ‘lam not looking for Henry.

She is looking for Henry. She is not looking for Henry.

We are looking for Henry. We are not looking for Henry.

Past continuous: was/were not + verb

Iwas running about. ‘lwas not running about.

Henry was running about. Henry was not running about.

The children were running about. The children were not running about.

Future: will not + verb

“Mrs Ghosh will complain. | Mrs Ghosh will not complain.

We will complain. We will not complain.

Put a tick (W) against the sentences that are correct. Put a cross (X) against those that

are incorrect.

a. They did not found Henry. L_] b. We did not ate lunch. [|
They did not find Henry. L_| We did not eat lunch.

c. I did not reach late. L] d. Priya does not like junk food. [|
I did not reached late. L Priya does not likes junk food. [|

e. She does not walk to school. H f. Teji does not bullies others. 7

She does not walks to school. Teji does not bully others.

Rewrite these sentences using not.

a. Mrs Ghosh likes papayas. Short forms:

b. People are afraid of chameleons. do + not = don't
c. My sister and I were working on our project. does + not = doesn't
d, The baby is crying. did + not = didn't
e. Iam watching T.V. is + not = isn't

are + not = aren't

was+ not = wasn't

were + not = weren't

Notice how we use the first or
base form of the verb with not
_ for the simple past tense.

7 ~
It's a chameleon.

Spellin
P g Its name is Henry.
It's or its? SX |

-

It’s means it is. The apostrophe stands for the missing letter i of is.
It is a chameleon.

Its means belonging to it.

Its name = the chameleon’s name
What is that on the chameleon's head?
It's its crest!

Fill in the blanks with its or it’s.

ssanseaveses a hot day! The puppy is thirsty. ............ mouth is dry.
sesseseseens looking for some water. Here is some water. ....+.. cool and the puppy laps it
up. How happy the puppy is! Look, .........0+ WAQZING ssveesssseeee tail!

Y Y gging

Write well

Grandfather saved Henry and took him home. This was an act of kindness. Think about
a time you were kind to someone. Write a short composition about what you did and
how it made you feel. Here are a few questions you can use as thinking prompts.

Who were you kind to?

When did this happen?

Where did this happen?

What difficulty was the person facing?
What did you do to help?

How did you feel?

Answer the questions given above. Then put your ideas into paragraphs and write a
composition that tells us all about your act of kindness.
Listen and speak well @

Listen to some information about Ruskin Bond. Fill in the timeline to show the order of

events in his life.

‘Timeline of Ruskin Bond’s life

> 7 \ a —S\
Went to
London
to study
further
XN SN AN XN om AN

Now, use this timeline to fill in three important events in your life. You need not give
specific dates. Choose any three events to share with the class.

Timeline of your life

[ I I I
“Sf ~ we ~ “ “

