4 # ine ero of Haarle

Haarlem is a city in the Netherlands’. Netherlands means low
countries. The ground there is lower than the level of the sea. The
people build dykes? all around the country to prevent the sea
water from rushing in. These walls are very important for the safety
of the people. Now let us read a story about a boy from Haarlem
who spotted something that did not look right ...

Many long years ago, in the city of Haarlem, there lived a

taking care of the dykes, or the stone walls that kept the sea What was the work
| that Hans’ father did?

water from rushing into Haarlem and washing it away. Why was it important?

One day, Hans’ father went on a trip. Since he usually

‘Netherlands: a country in Western Europe dykes: great, thick walls as wide as roads
Bs

spent his holidays watching his father care for the dykes, Hans had nothing to do.

‘I'm going to bake some bread and a few cakes, said Hans mother. Why don't you take
some to old Mr Jansen this afternoon?’

Hans happily agreed even though it was a rainy day.
Mr Jansen was an elderly man whose eyesight was failing.
He had no family to care for him and he lived alone with

his pet dog, Alfons. Hans’ mother often helped him with mother help Mr
. 3 Jansen? Do you also
his household chores’. know somebody like

Mr Jansen who could
use your help?

In the afternoon, Hans mother packed a basket of cake and
bread for Mr Jansen." We will have dinner at six 0’ clock
so come back before that, she said as she gave Hans the
basket.‘I won't* be late; replied Hans.

It was a long walk to Mr Jansen’s
house. He lived at the edge of the
town, close to the dykes, The spring
rain had been much heavier than
usual, pouring down hard, each day
and night. While the wind turned

the windmills, and the rain watered
the tulips, the strained and swollen
dykes kept filling, worrying Hans as
he passed. The hard rain pelted® him
and the piercing® cold wind stung’ his
cheeks, but he pressed on’, keeping his
head down, hunching’ his shoulders

and pulling his coat tight about him. ail

“Who will take care of the dykes if

something goes wrong while Father is away?’ wondered Hans.

Hans reached Mr Jansen's house with the basket of goodies. Mr Jansen was delighted
that Hans had come to visit him.‘Sit down, my lad, the old man said.

3chores: tasks that you do regularly “won't: will+not pelted: fell very heavily ‘piercing: (of the wind or
cold) very strong wind that feels as if it can pass through your clothes and skin stung: caused sharp pain
®pressed on: (here) continued to walk *hunching: bending the top part of the body forward while raising
the shoulders and head

-

5
Mr Jansen enjoyed telling Hans stories about how things were long ago and the boy
loved to listen to him. The old man and the boy talked and talked. They shared the
cake and bread. Minutes turned into hours. Suddenly Hans looked at the clock.

‘It’s past six o’ clock!’ he exclaimed.‘I wont reach in time for dinner! Mother will be

waiting for me!’

Hans quickly said good night to Mr Jansen and began the long walk home. His

wooden shoes clicked and clacked against the wet and muddy brick road. The rain had

not let up’®. The street was empty. Everyone had gone home, taking shelter from the

cold rain.

Hans was thinking about a warm dinner and a cosy bed when he passed one of the

many dykes. Something did not look right. Hans crept"! closer to the dyke to see.
There, in the middle of the high stone wall, in between the stone blocks, was a small
hole. From the hole seeped” a thin trickle of water.

While Hans knew that the dripping water looked harmless, he also knew that the water

building up behind the great wall would push at the tiny hole until it became bigger and

bigger. Soon it would let the water come rushing through, washing away the town.

‘Help!’ Hans called out.‘Someone help me!
‘The dyke is going to burst!’ But the wind

drowned out” Hans cries. He was sure

nobody had heard him. There would be no
help.

Hans knew he had to think fast and do
something quickly.‘I will plug the hole with

; my hand, he decided and he pushed his fist

in the hole. The water stopped trickling".

‘The rain kept pelting and the wind
continued to swirl’. But still Hans kept his
fist plugged in the hole. He knew that in

order to save his town, he could not let the

water break through the dyke.

‘let up: reduced in strength “crept: moved slowly and carefully "seeped: flowed slowly and in a small
quantity “drowned out: made a sound so loud that other sounds couldn't be heard over it “trickling:
water flowing slowly in a thin line swirl: move around quickly in a circle

2
Then suddenly, standing before him was Mr Jansen who had come out to walk Alfons.
“Hans! he cried.“What are you doing here?’

“There is a leak in the dyke! cried Hans. ‘Please hurry and get help!’
Mr Jansen immediately got help. Soon, a group of people came and repaired the dyke.
“My lad, said Mr Jansen, ‘first I'll take you home and then I'll tell everyone of the boy

who saved the town’

(adapted)

ary Mapes Dodge (1831-1953) was the author of many
M stories for children. Her best known novel is Hans Brinker;

or, the Silver Skates: A Story of Life in Holland from which this
excerpt has been taken.

Making connections

Quick answers

1. Fill in the story map given below.

‘Setting Characters
Where does the story take place? Who are the people in the story?
Time

When does the story take place?

Nn fH

-
Problem or Conflict Solution or Resolution

What happened to the How was the problem solved?
character?
Nn

2. Complete the following sentences.

a. Dykes were built so that

b. Hans’ mother sent cake and bread to Mr Jansen because .

c. Hans enjoyed Mr Jansen's company because

d. As he walked home, Hans was very cold and wet. This is why he was thinking

about

Reference to context

3. While the wind turned the windmills, and the rain watered the tulips, the strained and
swollen dykes kept filling.
a. Apart from the dykes, which two other things mentioned in these lines tell us
where the story is set?
b, What does the author mean by saying the dykes were swollen?
c. What did Hans wonder when he saw the dykes?
4, “My lad; said Mr Jansen, ‘first I'll take you home and then I'll tell everyone of the boy
who saved the town!’
a. Where was Mr Jansen when he said these lines?
b. Who did Mr Jansen call my lad? Why did he want to get him home?
c. This line shows that Mr Jansen was
i. angry with the boy.
ii. proud of the boy.
iii. scared of the boy.
d. What do you think Mr Jansen would tell the people of Haarlem?

Read, reflect and write

5. List the words and phrases from the story that describe the weather.

6. Why do you think Mr Jansen was always very happy when Hans came to visit?

7. Do you think The Hero of Haarlem is a good title for this story? Give a reason to
support your answer. Suggest another suitable title for the story.

8. List two qualities of Hans that you admire. How do Hans actions in the story show
us that he has these qualities?

Quality Action that shows the quality

Word wall

Mr Jansen loved telling stories. Stories can be classified into different genres or
categories. A genre is a style or category of art, music, or literature.

1. Here is an exercise that describes different types of stories. Choose the correct
genre label from the box to complete the flow chart. One has been done for you.

veceeeees folktale .........

ashort story thathss | |i
sseseseennennsnensnsnsunsneeaneenenenennnansnsss been passed down from a suspense filled story
a short moral story, usually generation to generation about a puzzling event that
with animals as characters is not solved until the end

of the story

PANE “mn secsvveesrnees
even dangerous things stories —____.. astory about magical
happen to the characters people, places and animals

rere Ct rr rrr rrr ttre r rrr rrr ert rrr rere rr errr rir

a story that uses descriptions —_a story of a real person's
of science and technology— __life written by the person
often set in the future, it may

include robots, aliens and

time machines

Antonyms

Antonyms are the opposites of a word.
2. Find words from the story that are the antonyms of the following words.

a. unkind (page 50) b. young (page 51) _—c. rarely (page 51)
d. saddened (page 51) e.no one (page 52) _ f. destroyed (page 52)

Grammar time

Future tense

Read these sentences.
I am going to bake some bread and cake.
I won't be late.
I will plug the hole with my hand.
I'll take you home.
I'll tell everyone of the boy who saved the town.

‘These sentences are about actions that have not yet happened.
They tell us what will happen at a time in the future -

Oye

The future tense is a tense expressing an action that has not yet happened.

‘There are two ways in which we talk about the future.
am/is/are going to + verb | will + verb

We bought flour and eggs yesterday. We _ It’s raining. I'll wear my raincoat.
are going to bake a cake this afternoon. | promise | will come early. | won't be late.
| am going to Amsterdam next year.

We use be + going to
for an action that we
decide to do before
talking about it.

to do something at the time
of speaking.

We also use will in promises.

1. Look at the pictures and answer the questions.

a. What are the children going to do

c. What are the children going to do on

oa

tomorrow?

‘The children are going to plant.atree, Tom

b. What is Tom going to do tomorrow?

Saturday?

‘The children

Jenny

e. What are you going to do on Sunday?

I

2. Fill in the blanks using will + verb.

a.

b.

the fan.

I'm feeling hot. I
Are you going to the library? We
you.

He is late. We

d. What is Jenny going to do next week?

not

| will = I'll
you will = you'll
she will = she'll
he will = he'll

we will = we'll

with

they will = they'll

for him.

will + not = won't

3. Write three classroom promises using will + verb.

We will keep our classroom tidy.
We will not speak out of turn.

Future continuous tense

Read these sentences.
We will have dinner at six o clock. We will be having dinner at six oclock.

We will still be
eating at 6 o'clock.

We will begin eating We will begin eating
at 6 o'clock. before 6 o'clock.

Onm

The future continuous tense is a tense expressing an ongoing action—
an action that will be happening in the future.

4. Can you spot the sentences that show ongoing action in the future?
Put a tick against them.

a. We will drive to school tomorrow.
We will be driving to school at 8 oclock.

b. We will play when the recess bell rings.

LI LU

. Weill be playing during recess.
58
5. Complete these sentences to show what you will be doing at these times.

a. I will be at 5 oclock this evening.
b. I will be at 9 oclock tonight.
c. I will be at midnight.

Pronunciation @
Syllable pyramid

You have learnt that words are made of one or more syllables.
Some words are short. They have only one syllable.
Example: cat

Some are longer. They have two syllables.
Example: ti/ger

Some others are still longer and have three or more syllables.
Example: chim/pan/zee

So here we have an animal word pyramid.

CAT
TIGER
CHIMPANZEE

Now build syllable pyramids on any one of the following topics.

animals = clothing = classroom __— food

You may also choose a topic of your own.

Write well

Imagine that you are Hans and that your grandparents live in
Amsterdam. Write a letter to them describing the adventure you had
on the evening that you saved the town.

Your Address:

Date:

Salutation: Dear

Greeting:

Body:

Last evening

On my way home
Sol
Luckily
Now

Closing:

Your first name:

Listen and speak well @

1. Hans’ cousins will visit him in May. Listen to Hans’ plans for the things that they will
do together. Then match the columns.

A B
Teyler’s museum to Adriann windmill
Grote market to watch boats and steamers
Flower parade to see Dutch paintings
Canal walk to watch the floats
Bridge over the Spaarne river to buy wooden clogs

2. Now imagine that your cousins live in another city and are coming to visit you.
Take turns in sharing what you would do if they came to your village, town or city.

You could talk about: monuments to see, places to visit, arts and crafts, festivals,
music and dance, and the food you can eat.
