e.

Can you help thi AS
you help this athlete trace his path [gi
to the Olympic flame? |

Where is this flame lit every four years?
Where did the Olympic Games originate? Let us
read this chapter to learn some interesting facts =
about the Summer Olympics. ]

The Olympic Games got their name from Olympia, a place in Greece, where
they were first held. The games began as a religious festival. The ancient Greeks
dedicated the Olympic Games to the god Zeus.

‘The Greeks held the first Olympic Games over 2,700 years ago, in the year 776 BC,

and had only one event, a sprint (a short run that was called the stade).

‘The race was run by men. A wreath! of olive branches was placed on the
winner's head. Olive trees were sacred to the Greeks.

‘The four-year period between two Olympic
Games is called an Olympiad. Every four years,
How were winners for 1,170 years, the Greeks held an Olympics,

rewarded in the

ly Olympics?
early Olympics

which continued to grow and change.

Many more sports were added, including
other races, wrestling, boxing, pentathlon’, and

equestrian events (events with horses and people, like chariot races and

‘wreath: a circle of flowers and leaves o *pentathlon: five events, including the long jump, javelin throw,
discus throw, foot race and wrestling
horse races). Then the Byzantine Emperor Theodosius came to the throne.

He was a very stern’ ruler. He thought that the Olympic Games distracted* people
from paying attention to religion, and so he banned the games in the year 394 AD,

Pierre de Frédy, Baron de Coubertin, a French aristocrat®, educator and sportsman,
revived® the Olympic Games in 1896. In that year the games
were held in Athens, Greece. Baron de Coubertin became the Which word

founder of the International Olympic Committee and designed means prevented

the flag of the Olympics. something from
happening?
The Olympic flag has five interlocking’ rings on a white

background. The blue, yellow, black, green and red rings
represent the five parts of the world that were joined together in the Olympic
movement: Africa, the Americas, Asia, Australia and Europe.

The Olympic flag was first used in the 1920 Olympic Games in Antwerp, Belgium.
The Olympic flag is paraded® during the opening ceremony of each Olympic Games.
At the end of an Olympics, the mayor of the host city presents the flag to the mayor of
the next host city. The flag remains in the town hall of the next host city until the next
Olympic Games, four years later.

The tradition’ of the Olympic flame began during

~ oS the ancient Olympic Games. A flame was lit for
each Olympics, every four years, and it burned
throughout the games. There was no torch relay”
in the ancient Olympics. The first torch relay took
place at the 1936 Games in Berlin, Germany.

[Z

For each Olympics, a new flame is started in the
ancient Olympic stadium in Olympia, Greece, using
a mirror to focus the rays of the sun. This flame

begins its Olympic Torch Relay by touring Greece.

3stern: serious and strict “distracted: unable to pay attention ‘aristocrat: a rich and stylish person

who belongs to the upper class ‘revived: started doing something again interlocking: connecting
together ‘paraded: displayed (something) very obviously *tradition: a belief, custom or way of doing
something that has existed for a long time among a particular group of people ‘torchrelay: an event during
which a ceremonial torch is carried on a designated route by a succession of torchbearers

62

‘The flame is taken (usually by aeroplane) to the country where the games will be held.
Then a few chosen citizens” carry the flame across the country. It is an honour to carry
the torch. It is carried by people running, walking, riding or

even scuba diving! The last runner uses the torch he carries to

light the large Olympic flame at the stadium. This flame burns Why do you
think the Olympic
flame is carried

around in the host

country?

throughout the games. It is extinguished”? during the closing
ceremony.

A new Olympic torch is designed for each of the games. The
Olympic motto is ‘Citius, Altius, Fortius, which means ‘Swifter,
Higher, Stronger’ It describes the goals of great athletes and
sportspersons all over the world.

There are two other Olympic Games—the Winter Olympic Games and the
Paralympics. The Winter Olympic Games are a winter sport event held every four
years. They feature winter sports held on snow or ice, such as skiing, figure skating”,
bobsleighing™ and ice hockey. The Paralympic Games are a multi-sport event held for
athletes with physical and visual challenges.

‘The picture shows the logo” designed for the 2016 Games in Brazil. The logo has three
figures, in the yellow, green,

and blue of the Brazilian flag,
joined at the arms and in a triple
embrace. The shape represents
the Sugarloaf Mountain”® of
Brazil.

The Olympic Games are

a special competition.

They celebrate the spirit of
sportsmanship and spread the

E

message of unity and peace.

“citizens: people who have the legal right to belong to acountry “extinguished: to make a fire stop
burning "figure skating: a type of ice skating in which you cut patterns in the ice and do jumps and spins
“bobsleighing: a sport where one can slide down on an ice-covered inclined surface “logo: a printed
design or symbol that a company or an organization uses as its special sign ‘Sugarloaf Mountain: a peak
situated in Rio de Janeiro
Making connections

Quick answers

1. Draw up a timeline to show the important milestones of the Olympic Games.

ui
776 BC 2016
First Olympic
Games

2. Choose the correct answer.
a. The ancient Olympic Games were held to honour the god
i. Olympia. ii. Athens. iii. Zeus.
b, The winners of the stade were given
i, a flag with rings. ii, a wreath of olive branches. _ iii, a bronze medal.
c. If you take part in a pentathlon, you compete in
i. three events. ii. four events. iii. five events.
d, Chariot racing was part of the
i. pentathlon. ii. equestrian events. iii stade.
e. For every Olympic Games, the torch relay begins at
i, Olympia. ii. London. iii. Antwerp.

Reference to context

4. ‘The tradition of the Olympic flame began during the ancient Olympic Games.
a. How is the Olympic flame lit?
b, Which word in the passage means a custom that has been going on for many
years, one that we still carry on?
c. Where is the flame taken once it has been lit? How long does it burn?
5. The logo has three figures, in the yellow, green, and blue of the Brazilian flag, joined at the
arms and in a triple embrace. The shape represents the Sugarloaf Mountain of Brazil.
a. Which is the logo that is being referred to in the extract?
b. How often is an Olympic logo changed?
c. What do we call the period between two Olympics?

Read, reflect and write

6. What is the motto of the Olympic Games? Do you think it is a suitable motto?
Give a reason for your answer.

7. How does the Olympic flag stand for the message of unity and peace?

8. Name the three types of Olympic Games mentioned in the chapter. Why is there a
need for three different Olympics?

9, Why do you think the Olympics are a special competition?

Word wall

Tree word search

1. Olive trees were sacred to the Greeks. Hidden in the word search puzzle are names
of other sacred trees. Look closely and find them. Match the names of the trees to

their pictures.

< Zc zZl]w\c}e/>I\r |

> OU Z Prlwrwa rin Fle
Oj rT wl rlolnin aia
— >, FOU >r\| ro >Y!|>
< 7 >Fiwva/O\|F!|wm  O!|AK

Games

2. Here are a few symbols showing games and sports. Below each symbol is a
scrambled word. Rearrange the letters to get the name of the game or the sport.

oon
. ; a, —— b. RCYAHRE
Kn & x

c DOUJ d. YCSGMSANTI e. HTWEGI GINTLFI

Grammar time

Subject—-verb agreement:
Matching nouns and verbs

Read these sentences.
‘The mayor presents the flag.
‘The citizen carries the flame.
‘The mayors present the flag.
‘The citizens carry the flame.

We all know the meaning of agree, but when we talk about main verb remains

noun—verb agreement, we mean matching nouns and verbs the same when we
according to number. use a helping verb

Helping verbs also agree with nouns.
‘The flag is paraded. ‘The flags are paraded.

The girl was carrying a torch. ‘The girls were carrying a torch.
- are also called

auxiliary verbs.
2. Circle the verbs that match or agree with the nouns.

Caterpillars turn/turns into butterflies.

A butterfly fly/flies from flower to flower.

‘The student monitors help/helps the teachers.
‘The students do/does their work.

The men is/are planting trees on the hill.

The women is/are driving tractors.

The children was/were playing on the swings.

. Lam/is learning to match nouns and verbs.
We enjoy/ enjoys reading mystery stories.

Sr mga mean ot Bw

‘They eat/eats lots of leafy green vegetables.

Look at the subject carefully in the given sentences. Is the subject singular (one), or

plural (many)?

™é The wreath is made of olive leaves.

4%

4 Ihe wreath = singular. One wreath, even though it has many
leaves.

\y g Zhe leaves in the wreath are from an olive tree.

The leaves = plural. Many leaves, even though they are in one

wreath and from one olive tree.

The plate of biscuits is on the table.
A plate of biscuits = singular. One plate, even though it has IF F#i#_}

many biscuits. +
The biscuits in the packet are broken. . ~ fF

y
The biscuits in the packet = plural. Many biscuits, even though a— 7]

9 ; / f
they are in a single packet. Se

al th The class is quiet.

The class = singular. One class, because we are speaking of all

the students as one group.

The students in the classroom are quiet.

The students in the classroom = plural. Many students, even
though they are in one classroom.
2. Fillin the blanks by using is or are to complete these sentences.

a. The school hockey team playing a match this afternoon.

b, The players in the team very good.

c. The shelf of books dusty.

d. The books on the shelf dusty.

e. The travellers in the bus tired.

f, The bus full of travellers driving up the hill.
Pronunciation
Syllable stress

When we say a word out loud, we put more stress on certain syllables.
With words that end in -ic, we put more stress on the syllable just before the -ic.

Practise saying these words with stress on the correct syllable.

Oflym/pic mu/sic co/mic geo/graph/ic ma/gic pu/blic

gi/gan/tic ac/a/dem/ic en/er/get/ic a/po/lo/get/ic vol/can/ic

Write well

If you could change places with your favourite sportsperson for a week, who would you
change place with? Write a short composition describing what you would do for that
week. Here are some questions you could think about:

What would your daily routine be?
What would you do in your free time?
How would you greet your fans?

How would you feel when you won a game?
\), What would you say to encourage young players?
Listen and speak well @

1. Do you recognize the symbol you see in the pictures? What does it stand for? Who
designed this symbol? Let us learn a little more about it.

2. Puta tick (%) against the sentences that are true and a cross (X) against those that are
not. Listen to your teacher carefully before answering.

a. Dr Ludwig Guttmann believed that people with challenges should compete in
sporting events.

b. No one took notice of the competition at Stoke-Mandeville.

c. The Paralympics are not as popular as other sporting events.

d, The word agito means, I move.

e. The motto of the Paralympics games is Spirit in Motion.

{LLL

3. Draw a picture of your school emblem or logo and write down what your school
motto stands for.

Now, in groups, design a logo for any one of the following:
a. your classroom b, the school library
c. asports club d, an environment-watch group

Then share your work with the class, explaining the importance of the pictures,
colours and words that you have chosen.
