Read the sentences. Tick the ones which are true and put a
cross against the sentence that is not true. You can look up
the information.

Bees have 2 pairs of wings. C)
Bees have 5 eyes. C)
Bees have 6 legs. C)
Bees live on all 7 continents. C)

Bees beat their wings 200 times per second. This makes a buzzing sound. C)

Let's read a story about a bear who 3
heard a very loud buzzing. pte

Winnie-the-Pooh was out walking in the woods
when he saw a large oak tree, and, from the top
of the tree, there came a loud buzzing noise.

Winnie-the-Pooh began to think. “The only
reason for a making a buzzing noise is because
youre a bee. The only reason for being a bee is
making honey. And the only reason for making
honey is so I can eat it.” So, he began to climb
the tree.

He climbed and climbed and sang a little song.

It’s a very funny thought that, if Bears were Bees,
They'd build their nests at the bottom of trees.
And that being so (if the Bees were Bears),

We shouldn’t have to climb up all these stairs.

oO)

What was the complaint
in Pooh's song?

He was nearly there now, and if he just stood on that branch ... Crack!
“Oh, help!” said Pooh, as he dropped way, way down into a gorse-bush.

He crawled out and began to think again. And the first person he thought of was his friend
Christopher Robin.

So, Winnie-the-Pooh

went to Christopher Robin,
who lived behind a green —
door in the forest.

—
~
STAs eee elt -

“Good morning, Christopher
Robin,” he said. “I wonder if you’ve got a balloon?”

SWE ier ccs

“A balloon? What do you want a balloon for?”
asked Christopher.

(:
SS

“Honey!” said Winnie-the-Pooh in a deep whisper.
“But you don’t get honey with balloons!”
“I do,” said Pooh. “It’s like this,” he said. “The thing is not to let the bees

How, according

know you're coming. If you have a blue balloon, they might think you xa Bayeha, wysullel

were only part of the sky, and not notice you. Isn’t that just brilliant!” Hie ele eater

be useful?
“Wouldn’t they notice you underneath the balloon?” Robin asked.

He thought for a moment and said: “T shall try to look like a small black cloud. That will
deceive them.”

“Then take this blue balloon,” Christopher said. Winnie-the-Pooh held the blue balloon
and went to a muddy place and rolled around till he was black all over.

gorse-bush: a bush with thin, sharp leaves and small yellow flowers
deceive: to make somebody believe something that is not true

When the balloon was blown up, Pooh Bear floated gracefully up into the sky, and stayed
there—level with the top of the tree and twenty feet away from it.

“Do I look like a small black cloud in a blue sky?” asked Winnie-the-Pooh anxiously.
“You look like a bear holding on to a balloon,” Christopher said.

There was no wind to blow him nearer to the tree, so there Pooh stayed. He could see the
honey, he could smell the honey, but he couldn’t quite reach the honey.

After a little while, he called, “I think the bees suspect something!”
“What sort of thing?” Christopher asked.

What made
“T don’t know. But something tells me that they’re suspicious!” Pooh think that
the bees were
There was another little silence, and then Pooh called again. Sue SIGUE?

“Christopher Robin! You have an umbrella
in your house. Do bring it out here, and
walk up and down with it, and look up at
me every now and then, and say “Tut-tut,

it looks like rain.’ If you

; ; ———
did that, it would help Why did Winnie
the deception which we —_|_ want Christopher
are practising.” oe ln
Christopher laughed to

himself but he went home for his umbrella.

“Oh, there you are!” called Winnie-the-
Pooh as soon as Christopher got back. “T
was beginning to get anxious. The bees are now definitely suspicious.”

While Christopher walked up and down, Winnie-the-Pooh sang this song:

How sweet to be a Cloud
Floating in the Blue!
Every little cloud
Always sings aloud.

Do you think this
plan will help

Winnie-the-Pooh
get the honey?

gracefully: ina smooth and relaxed way — anxiously: in a worried or nervous manner
suspect: to believe that someone is possibly up to something that is bad suspicious: feeling that something is wrong
or that someone is behaving wrongly deception: the act of making somebody believe something that is not true
The bees were still buzzing suspiciously. One sat down on the nose of the ‘cloud’.
“Christopher—ow!—Robin,” called out Pooh.
“Yes?”

“T have just been thinking, and I have come to a very important decision. These are the
wrong sort of bees, so I think they make the wrong sort of honey.”

“Do they?”

“Yes. So, I shall come down.”

A.A. Milne (1882-1956) was an English author, renowned for creating Winnie-
the-Pooh. He was also a playwright and essayist. Milne was the father of
bookseller Christopher Robin Milne, upon whom the character Christopher
Robin is based. During a visit to London Zoo, Christopher became fond

of a bear called Winnipeg. This incident inspired Milne to write the story of
Winnie-the-Pooh for his son. Milne’s works have captivated readers worldwide,
especially the stories of Winnie-the-Pooh.

In this section, we will:
* remember details about
the story.

Make connections * learn how to analyse the

structure of a story.
(C-2.1, 2.2)

Map the story
Answer the following questions based on the story.

1. The setting describes the place and the environment of a story. It helps us picture a story. Tick the
words and phrases that the author has used to help readers picture the setting.

a. middle of a forest @ b. busy city OC)
c. buzzing sound oS) d. coconut palms C)
e. tall oak tree C) f. beehive C)
g. gorse-bush C) h. sunflowers C)

2. Characters are those who play a role (think, feel and act) in a story. The main character is the one
around whom the story revolves. Who is the main character in this story?

a. Winnie-the-Pooh
b. Christopher Robin
c. the bees

OOO
3. The plot is the sequence of events in a story. Plots have conflicts. Conflicts are problems that the
main characters face. Which of these lines describes the problem in the story?

a. “I wonder if you've got a balloon?” asked Winnie-the-Pooh. ‘eo
b. He could see the honey, he could smell the honey, but he couldn't quite reach ‘eo
the honey.
c. “Yes. So, I shall come down.” C)
Deep dive

Answer the following questions with reference to context.

1. He crawled out and began to think again. And the first person he thought of was his friend
Christopher Robin.

ir » >)
RECALL INFER | ANALYSE
a. Who crawled out and c. Why do you think d. Who is the first person
from where? Winnie-the-Pooh you think of when you are
b. How did he get in there? thought of Christopher in trouble? What qualities
Robin? do they have in common
| J) \ with Christopher Robin? |
2. “Yes. So, I shall come down.”
7 \\ ‘)
RECALL INFER ) [ ANALYSE
a. What reason did b. Do you think the reason c. Do you think Pooh
Winnie-the-Pooh give he gave was the real remained cheerful even
for coming down at the reason? Explain your though he did not get
end of the story? answer. what he wanted? Give a
tt | |. reason for your answer.
oe a af

Read, reflect and write

1. Draw upa chart like the one below and write two qualities of a good friend that you see in the
character Christopher Robin. Give evidence from the story for each.

Qualities : Evidence from the story
2. Arealistic story is one that could happen. A fantasy is a story that cannot happen in real life. Which
type of story is “Winnie and the Bees’? Give a reason for your answer.

Integrate
° ——

Bees build honeycombs out of a wax that they secrete. Crrr
Honeycombs are made of six-sided shapes called hexagons. 3 " é
Can you name and draw some shapes that have three, four /

. ~ - VALRE
and five sides? 5d ‘

a hexagon

In this section, we will:

* identify synonyms of action
words,

* make new words with
existing letters of another
word, (C-4.1, 4.2)

Word wall

Synonyms
In the story, Winnie-the-Pooh says, asks and whispers. We often use similar words to describe the
same action, like jump, leap and bounce.

Look at the colour of each of the action words given below. Now, colour the synonyms of
each word in the table using the same colour.

talk walk eat fly see

gulp gaze - stroll == mumble soar
stare =—S——shover ~=—S=—S—s shout’ ~=———Ssswallow —_—sstride |
oe a ae ee ee
— : _— ——— olf (down) os anes

Building words
How many words can you make with the letters in the honeycomb? List them.

(Do not repeat letters in a word.)

Be wee es ee

a

In this section, we will:

* learn to identify and use
concrete and abstract
nouns, (C-3.4)

Grammar time

Nouns: Concrete and abstract

Read these sentences.
e Winnie-the-Pooh wanted some honey from the bees.
e Christopher Robin had a balloon.

The words in pink in the sentences given above are nouns. Nouns name a person, place, animal
or thing.

Read these sentences.
e Winnie-the-Pooh had a thought. e The bees were not fooled by the deception.
The words thought and deception are also nouns. They name qualities, ideas and feelings.
pin ANCHOR
CHART «25.
CONCRETE AND ABSTRACT NOUNS ‘
Nouns can be concrete or abstract. ‘
Concrete nouns Abstract nouns
are names of people, places, animals ‘are qualities, ideas and feelings, '
OUR and things experienced through one not experienced through any of
FIVESENSES __ or more of our five senses. our five senses. ‘
sessusssnsnsisarsvsstssirsenesasscesfesessesssscsutsuceseussussussussssessuscusseesssasscsscessensfesssesssssessssersssesossecsaceseessessesusensseenseesees
taste "7 v x !
touch Y o x
® ° " 3
see 1
hear 5) Jv x
smell } J x
coe ee
; Examples: hope, freedom, truth,
Examples: school, ant, cup ‘kindness

ee
iii ee el
1. Read the information given below and fill in the table.

Noun : Type of Noun
Concrete or Abstract?

a. bear 7 Concrete

b. suspicion - Abstract
a ae
Fi) a
ear os
f. honesty

; honey ooo cesessesesueseuseueesusuesseseesescessessususeessseapscsceseeseiueasesseusesesseuueussuussesessesueseesseseusessensesesuneeeses

h. disappointment

2. Choose abstract nouns from the box to fill in the blanks. You may choose the words that
you think fit the concrete nouns the best.

memory cunning beauty speed
loyalty gentleness wisdom hard work

A cheetah is known for its
A peacock is known for its

aT PS

A dog is known for its

a 9

A lamb is known for its

An owl is known for its

A bee is known for its

An elephant is known for its

ma rh oO

A fox is known for its

Which qualities are you known for?

@)
3. Write sentences about yourself choosing any 5 of the given abstract nouns.

courage kindness honesty imagination
truth peace confidence joy

Pronunciation
Syllables

Every word is made up of at least one syllable.

A syllable is a unit having one vowel sound.

Some words have only one syllable or vowel sound.

town fun fist hat hand jump red

Some words have two syllables or vowel sounds.

wis/dom sum/mer peo/ple bul/ly

Some words have more than two syllables or vowel sounds.

per/mis/sion grand/mo/ther min/is/ter in/tel/li/gence

Listen to your teacher read these words aloud and then repeat them.

mo/ther al/so sis/ter rus/ty
he/li/cop/ter ro/yal faith/ful a/woke
in/de/pen/dent mun/ching ad/ven/ture af/ter/noon

patience

strength

In this section, we will:

* learn how to pronounce
certain syllables.
(C-1.1)

tone stop

pro/fes/sion

co/rrec/ted
cru/el/ty
in/for/ma/tion

@)
In this section, we will:
* learn how to write a

summary.
(C-3.2, 3.4)
Write well
Summary writing
Summary
What is a summary? ,
A summary is a short retelling of the main events from the story in your own words, 4 a
Rewrite the story “Winnie and the Bees’ in short in your notebook using
the cues given in the graphic organizer below. Fa
Somebody Who is the main character? =
Wanted What did the character want?
But : What was the problem? What stopped the character from getting what
they wanted?
So How did the character try to solve the problem?
Then : How did the story end?

Listen and speak well

1.

In this section, we will:

¢ listen to a story and test our
understanding.

* tell our classmates about
an adventurous or exciting
thing we have done.

(C-11, 2)

Listen to the story and put the sentences in the right order.

a. The traveller told everyone about the things he had seen and done.
b. The traveller returned home.

c. The traveller said that he had won a jumping competition at Rhodes.
d. The old man told the traveller to jump.

e. The traveller left his village and travelled to many faraway places.

OQOO0O0O

f. The traveller began to boast.

Take turns to tell your classmates about an adventurous or exciting thing that you have
done. Make sure you don't boast!
