Shangmiyang,
the Tangkhul Giant

Read the infographic given below on the giant whale and solve the question.

Blue whale: the world's largest animal

ia Mis Wiz Win Mia tin Oise ie
MMMM MEME.
— PAE,
PARE

A blue whale 40 elephants
An average Asian elephant weighs 4000 kgs. Estimate the weight of the blue whale from this.

Let's read a story about another giant, Shangmiyang.

Every night after dinner, Atiya and her family gathered to share stories. These
could be made-up ones or ones they already knew. It was always an exciting time
for the family!

However, today everything was running late. There was a power cut in their apartment,
bringing everything to a standstill. Atiya could not do her homework, Uncle Korou could not
watch the news and Grandmother Athoibi could not heat up the dinner she had prepared.

Suddenly, Atiya had a bright idea. She went to her grandmother What was the bright
who was lighting a candle in the living room. idea that Atiya had?

“Grandma, let us start the storytelling now. It is your turn today. And since the power has gone
out, we could gather here and have a candlelight storytelling session!” Atiya whispered excitedly.

Grandmother Athoibi immediately agreed. She loved telling stories too. She said, “Today, I
will tell you a special story from my hometown. Whenever there was a storm and the lights
went out, we would sit with a candle and my grandmother would tell me this story.”

gathered: came together in one place standstill a state in which all activity or movement has stopped
session: a period of time that is spent doing a specific activity immediately: without delay ()
Uncle Korou, who had just entered the room complaining of mosquitoes on the balcony,
also joined in. “Oh, I know which story it is - the story of Shangmiyang, the Tangkhul
Giant. It’s a tale that I have heard many times in my childhood.”

They all sat down together. With the dim light of the candle on their faces, Grandmother
Athoibi began her tale.

. ; . Les (
“Shangmiyang was a gentle giant,” said Grandma Athoibi. Why did Grandmother
« : ‘ : . Athoibi choose to tell the
He lived in the green Tangkhul hills where the pink, tale of Shangmiyang?

bell-shaped Shiroi Lily grows.”

“Shangmiyang was really, really, really huge,” continued Uncle Korou. “His hands were as
large as tall, rugged mountains. And his face was as wide as the open blue sky.”

Atiya was now completely captivated. She had never heard a story like this. Her eyes
grew wide!

Her grandmother laughed. “His eyes sparkled like the dazzling yellow sun and his breath
was as furious as the gale. It is difficult to describe him. He was as enormous as all the
mountains put together!”

“And,” added Uncle Korou, “He needed not one fish, but a hundred for a meal!”

dim: not bright rugged: not level or smooth and having rocks rather than plants or trees captivated: very interested
or fascinated by something sparkled: shone brightly with small flashes of light dazzling: so bright that you cannot
see for a short time furious: angry —_ gale: an extremely strong wind
Grandmother Athoibi continued, “When he slept, his head rested on the Shiroi Peak,
while his feet reached Thoubal in the valley far, far away. His left hand could easily touch
the river Chindwin in Myanmar while his right hand played with the waters of the river
Brahmaputra far away on the other side.”

“How enormous he must have been!” thought Atiya.
Grandma Athoibi went on:

“Once upon a time, a group of potters were travelling from village to village. They were
tired, for they had trudged countless valleys and mountains. As night fell, they lost their
way and found themselves near Shangmiyang.

“They did not know the gentle giant was sleeping nearby, for they only saw shadows all
around. They climbed hill after hill, seeking a way.

“At last, they crossed a strip of moist, pink land to reach the last hill. At the Ueiees

top, they found two huge, dark caves. the moist,
pink land?

“Ah-ha! they sighed with relief, happy to find shelter for the night.

“They clambered past a narrow ravine filled with small prickly trees and entered into one
of the two huge mountain caves.”

“They did not know they were inside Shangmiyang’s nostril!” Uncle Korou quietly told
Atiya. She giggled.

Grandma Athoibi giggled too. Then her voice grew serious once again.

trudged: walked slowly or with heavy steps, because one is tired or carrying something heavy

seeking: looking for something moist: slightly wet __ relief: the feeling of happiness when something unpleasant stops
clambered: climbed or moved with difficulty or with a lot of effort ravine: a deep, very narrow valley with steep sides
prickly: covered with one of several thin, sharp points that stick out of plants giggled: laughed in a silly manner
serious: careful and not joking; not silly
“They cleared a small place inside the nostril by cutting down some of the hairs that
grew there.

“What huge trees! called one of the potters.
“What wild trees! said another.

“And then, with great difficulty, with the paddle and stone they used to make their pots, the
potters shaped the trees into large tree logs for firewood.

“Soon they started a fire. They were about to cook rice when ...

“The fire irritated the giant Shangmiyang and he went .... AAACCCCHHHHHOOOOOO!!

“The giant's sneeze was so powerful that it blew the potters to the other end of the
Chindwin, far, far beyond the Tangkhul land.

“That’s why you find so many Tangkhul potters all over the place today,’ finished
Grandmother Athoibi. “From one end of the world to the other”

“And Shangmiyang?” asked Atiya.
“Well, he went back to sleep, dreaming about the Shiroi Fairy who was looking for her lost lily!”
“Will you tell me that story too?” asked Atiya.
“Let us keep that for after dinner, my dear? Grandmother Athoibi laughed.
Adapted from a Naga folktale

In this section, we will:
* remember details about

Make connections . Lan omnaersteatis

structure of the story.

Map the story (C-21.22)
Answer the following questions based on the story.

1. The narrator is the one who tells the story. Sometimes, the author uses a character in the story
as the narrator. Who narrates most of this story?

a. Shangmiyang C)
b. Uncle Korou C)
c. Grandmother Athoibi O

paddle: tool used to hit and shape clay in pottery

@)
2. An illustration is a picture that helps us understand a story better. Look at the illustrations in
the story again and think if they helped you understand the story better. Think of one more
illustration that you could add to the story and draw it. In a sentence or two, explain why you

chose the idea.

3, Myths are stories that explain how or why certain things happened in the world. This story is

a myth because it tells us
a. how the Shiroi lily came to the mountains.

b. why Shangmiyang’s story was popular.

c. why there are Tangkhul potters found all over the world.

Deep dive

Answer the following questions with reference to context.

O
O
O

1. Atiya was now completely captivated. She had never heard a story like this. Her eyes grew wide!

=,

»

ANALYSE )

c. What kind of stories
do you think Atiya had
heard before?

d. In what way do you think
this one was different?

“
RECALL ( INFER
a. What was Atiya b. From the phrase
‘completely captivated’ ‘eyes grew wide, what
by? emotion do you think
Atiya was feeling?
—

A}

=f

2. “They clambered past a narrow ravine filled with small prickly trees and entered into one of the

huge mountain caves.”

Z
RECALL ( INFER
a. What were the huge b. What could be the
mountain caves that the narrow ravine that the
potters entered? potters crossed to enter
the huge mountain
caves?

} (

\S

1!

ANALYSE

c. Discuss what could be
amusing or funny about
the potter's actions.

Read, reflect and write

1. Why do you think Grandmother Athoibi calls Shangmiyang’s story ‘special’?

2. List five comparisons the author uses to describe the giant Shangmiyang.
Integrate

The story names the mountains and rivers of Manipur. On a sheet of paper, list and illustrate the
mountains/hills, forests and water bodies around the area where you live. Discuss: How are they
important to the area? What can you do to conserve and protect them?

In this section, we will:

» identify antonyms of words
from the story.

* _unscramble names of
landforms and waterbodies.
(C-41, 4.2)

Word wall

Antonyms
Find words in the story that are opposite in meaning (antonyms) to the words given in the box.

bright cruel smooth dry weak

Unscramble the words

Grandmother Athoibi uses mountains and rivers to describe the gentle giant’s size. Unscramble
the words to get names of other landforms and waterbodies.

NDOP ANDSLI ELKA MEARST CHBAE LOVNOCA

In this section, we will:

* learn to identify and use
the definite article ‘the’
(C-3.4),

Grammar time

Definite article: the

Read these sentences.
e Atiya’s grandmother told her a story.

¢ Atiya loved the story about Shangmiyang.
e Atiya narrated a story to her friends.
e Atiya's friends liked the story she narrated.
The words highlighted in the sentences given above are articles.

A story refers to any story.
The story refers to a specific or definite story — the one about Shangmiyang and the one Atiya
narrated to her friends.
Beene nee.. OOM og ee ee ere eerste
Pe iii in eee il

' CHART (¢.
ARTICLES iz
: Articles are words that go before nouns. ‘
Definite articles ‘Indefinite articles
refer to a specific person, place or thing. - do not refer to a specific person, place or thing.

= =
iin te oe ee

the sun a clock an umbrella
The is used before both - A goes before singular An goes before singular
. singular or plural nouns. - nouns that start with nouns that start with a
‘ 'aconsonant sound. vowel sound. ;
., ’

-
==<<= —=sses ee ee —_=<= =
Senseo eee eee eer == == Seeeeee eee =*

Fill in the blanks with a, an or the in the short story given below.

There was once _________ flock of birds peacefully pecking at seeds under __m___ tree.
old hunter came along and threw a heavy net over them.

He said, ‘Aha! Now I have my dinner!’

All at once _______ birds began to flap their wings. Up, up they rose into ______aair, taking
net with them. They came down on _____ apple tree nearby, and as
net got caught in ______tree’s branches, ______ birds flew out from under it, to freedom.

_________ hunter looked on in wonder, scratched his head and muttered, ‘As long as those birds
work together with one another like that, Pll never be able to capture them! Each one of those
birds is so weak, yet together they can lift _____ nett

Geographical uses of the
Read these sentences.
e Shangmiyang’s body was as large as the Tangkhul hills.

e While Shangmiyang slept, his head rested on the Shiroi Peak.
e Shangmiyang's left hand could easily touch the river Chindwin in Myanmar.

We use the before the names of certain geographical features such as the names of rivers and
mountain ranges.

@)
Read the chart given below to learn more about the geographical uses of the.

wee ee ceer errr ttt tttes ANCHOR
GEOGRAPHICAL USES OF THE CHART Z.

We use the before the names of

a
'
i
a
1
1
1
1
1
|
LT]
1
i
i]
1
t
1]
1
Ly
1
i)

iin ee aa
- sss = ===-ece Le

s]|=|==|==28
iii a

4

of

oD
Deserts: the Sahara, Oceans and seas: the - Rivers and canals: the
the Gobi ' Atlantic Ocean, Nile, the Suez Canal
the Arabian Se
Mountain ranges:
Points on the the Alps, the Urals;
globe: the Equator, : hg ot but not before the
the North Pole names of mountains:
Mt Everest,
Mt Kilimanjaro
Groups of islands: Groups of lakes:
Islands, the West the Great Lakes; but
Indies: but not not before names of
before names of lakes: Lake Superior,
Chilika Lake

islands: Greenland

We do not use the before:

t

Names of Names of countries:

continents: Asia, _ India, Nepal, Bhutan.
Africa, Australia _ But we do say: the
Netherlands, the
USA and the UK

weesee= ===
“sss ee eee ee eee eee eS SS

Names of cities, Names of streets:
towns or states: Park Lane, Oxford
Mumbai, Madwa, - Street

Mizoram :

=-
=e fe ef Bk kes BBB se ee ee ee eee ee ee

o=*

==
iii te fe fe ee en ee
We usually pronounce the with a short sound like ‘thuh: But when the comes before a vowel sound, we
pronounce it as a long ‘thee’

Practise saying: the antelope, the earth, the umbrella, the onion, the inkpad.
How would you say: the unicorn?

"

Put a tick against the sentences in which the use of articles is correct.

1. Hillary and Tenzing climbed the Mt Everest. C)

2. Kanchenjunga is a mountain in the Himalayas. ©

3. The Asia is the largest continent. OC

4, There are very few trees in the Sahara Desert. C)

5. The Nile is the longest river in the world. ©

In this section, we wilk

Punctuation ap Monee

Comma
We use commas to separate words or word groups in a series (three or more things).

Read these sentences.
e Atiya lived with her grandmother, her mother, her father and her uncle.

e Grandmother Athoibi knew many stories of giants, fairies, animals and birds.

The use of commas in these sentences avoids confusion when we read and helps us pause at the
right moments and places while reading long sentences.

We also use commas before or surrounding the name or title of a person directly addressed.

e You, Shangmiyang, are a gentle and kind giant.
e Grandmother, will you tell us a story?
e Look where you step, potter.

Punctuate the sentences below with commas.

1. Assam Meghalaya and Arunachal Pradesh are known for their green hills and valleys.
Meghalaya has beautiful waterfalls caves clean villages and many bridges.

Assam is famous for its tea gardens the Brahmaputra river and the Majuli island.

I plan to learn about Manipur Nagaland Tripura and Mizoram next.

VP we NS

Mr Nienu can you teach us more about the northeastern states in Social Studies class?
Write well

Narrative writing

Given below is the summary of a myth. Write it out as a
story in your notebook adding lots of interesting details.

For example: Long, long ago, sea water was sweet, not
salty. One day a poor fisherman was fishing close to the shore.
Suddenly, he saw a woman with an interesting object!

Give the story a title and add an illustration or two.

Long ago, sea water was not salty - a woman gave a
magic grindstone to a fisherman — it started and stopped
with two different commands — neighbour saw only how
to start it - stole it - sailed away - ship cook needed salt
— neighbour commanded it to start giving salt - could
not stop it - too much salt - ship began to sink - sailors
threw it overboard - it still grinds salt at the bottom of
the sea.

Did you know?

A myth is a type of folktale. Folktales are stories that are
passed down from one generation to another. Atiya heard
the story from her grandmother who heard it from her
grandmother. So the story of Shangmiyang is a folktale.

Listen and speak well

In this section, we will:
* write a narrative.
(C-3.2, 3.4)

GOOD WRITERS ADD
DETAILS

Achecklist of details to
include:

¥Y colours, size and shapes
¥ tastes and smells

/ what something is made
of, how it feels through
touch

¥/ sound words

/ answers to the questions:
Who? What? Why?
Where? When?

¥ something special or
interesting

In this section, we wilk

+ listen to some clues and
solve a riddle.

« describe flowers to each
other, (C-11, 2.1)

1. The five little monsters are waiting for the school bus. Listen to the

clues and circle the monster which got on the bus last.

2. In groups of three, take turns to describe these flowers to one another. As one person
describes the flower, the other two must guess which picture it is. Do not mention the
names of the flowers in the description.

2@%

carnation dahlia hibiscus

“«e

poppy rose

