« Topicscovered .

@ What is history? @ Why do we learn history?

® Timelines in history e Periods of history

Find out about your family!

Copy this paragraph in your notebook. Fill the blanks with the help of your
parents or any elder in your family. Add photographs or drawings.

IN ..eceeeceseeees .

My mother’s parents are

When you find out these things, you
are finding out about the past. When
you look at old photographs of your
family, you are looking at the past.

WHAT IS HISTORY?

When you find out about past events in your family, or look at old family pictures,
you are learning your family history.

History tells us about the past. All people have a history. Places like buildings,
cities and countries also have a history. In history we learn about:

e The events that happened in the past, to people and to places.

e Why the events of the past happened.

e Famous people and the lives of ordinary people who lived in the past.

A famous person—Mahatma Gandhi, An ordinary person—A young boy
who fought for India’s freedom

When we learn about the past in this way, we are learning history.

J wart wogetil
WHY DO WE LEARN HISTORY? in
There are many reasons why we learn history. Ea :
1. Learning about the past is interesting. For example, history Resp th
tells us that earlier there was no Internet, so people wrote oe whch (] /
S~.d¢! so

letters to each other on paper. These were sent through the
A handwritten letter by

~ post office and took several
days to reach. Mahatma Gandhi

2. History helps us to understand how people
of earlier times lived. For example, when we
study history, we learn that in earlier times there
were no cars, trains, buses or aeroplanes. When
people travelled over land, they walked or

<a te travelled in vehicles drawn (pulled) by animals.
A horse-drawn carriage, called a tonga al
ni

3. History helps us to understand many things in
our world today. For example, when we study
history we learn why we celebrate August 15 as
Independence Day.

Along time ago the people of Greece had many different
gods and goddesses including Clio, the goddess for history. An Independence Day card
This tells us that they thought history was very important.

TIMELINES IN HISTORY

When you learnt about events that had happened in your family, you also learnt
when they happened. In the same way, when we learn about events in history we
learn when they happened.

Earlier you learnt that a timeline is useful because it tells us the order in which the
events happened. Look carefully at this timeline.

1869 Mahatma Gandhi is born.

1947 India becomes independent.

1950 India becomes a republic.

1975 India launches its first satellite, Aryabhata
2013 India sends a space mission to the planet Mars.

From this timeline we can tell that Mahatma Gandhi, one of the main leaders of
India’s struggle for freedom, was born many years before India became independent.
In fact, he was an old man of 78 years when India became free. We also learn that
India’s first satellite launch and then the space mission to Mars happened several
years after India’s independence. We are able to tell that after Independence, India’s
space missions got better and better. ; ££

Timelines are important when we study history
because they help us to understand when things
happened.

|
pep :
PERIODS OF HISTORY

Time is continuous but people have divided it into days, months and years. Like
time, history is also continuous. Some historians (people who study history)
think that it is easy to understand when events happened if history is divided into
‘periods’. These are very long stretches of time that lasted for many hundreds of
years. The periods into which historians divide the study of history are:

e The ancient or the very old period
e The medieval or the middle period
e The modern or the more recent period

Later, when you learn more history, you will see that though the past has been divided
like this, all parts of the world were not in a particular ‘period of history’ at the same time.

© Values and Life Skills

Think about these questions:
e Why do we need to study history?
e Why is it important to know about the past?

REMEMBER

1. History is the study of the people and events of the past.

2. We study history because it is interesting, it helps us to understand the past and it
also helps us to understand today’s world.

3. Timelines help to understand the order in which events happened.

4. Historians have divided the past into three periods.

3

WORDS

EXERCISES

A. Fill in the blanks.

1. When we look at old family photographs, we are looking at the .........ceseeseeees .

Qe ceeseesseseeseeseeeeeeneees is the study of the past.

3. In history we learn about famous ............sseseeeseees and also about the lives of
seseceeseeeseseaesenseeaee people.

4. History tells us why the «00.0... eeeeeeeeeee of the past happened.

5. Historians have divided the study of the past into ............ eee seeeeee periods.

B. Write true or false.

Correct the false sentences in your notebook.

1. In history we learn about what is happening these days.

2. History tells us when and why things happened.

3. Families do not have a history.

4. The stories of famous people and of people who were not famous are all part of
history.

5. We learn history for many different reasons.

C. Match the following.

A B
1. Time and History a. a person who studies history
2. Famous b. help us to understand when events happened.
3. Ordinary c. are continuous.
4. Historian d. known by many people
5. Timelines e. not special

D. Complete the sentences in your notebook.

1. We learn history bDeCause .............cceeseceeceseeeeeeaeeeeeaeseeeaeseeeeeeseeeeneseeess .
2. We also learn history because ...............seceeeceeececeeceneeeeeceeceneeaecceseneenees .
3. A third reason to learn history is DeECaUSE .............cceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeueeeeeenees .

E. Answer the following questions.

What is history?

Write three sentences about what we learn in history.

What is a timeline?

Why is a timeline important when studying history?

What are the three periods into which the study of history is divided?

be

ywRwN >

A. Picture study

. On your own

THINGS TO DO D oc cecasnasneenenasecennenseneenenesseeneeeseeeeenensaceannaeseeaenaenacansessaseneess

Look at these pictures and discuss the
questions given.

1. Which animals were used to pull
vehicles in earlier times? i
2. Why were letters written on paper?

How have things changed since earlier times? Talk to your grandparents and parents
about the following questions. Draw a table in your notebook like the one given
below and fill the first two columns with the information you get. Fill the third column
with what you already know or with the help of your teacher. Discuss this in class.

1. What transport did they use to go to school?

2. How many children were there in their class?

3. What games did the children play?

4. How much did a slab of chocolate cost?

Your grandparents’ time Your parents’ time Now

In a group

Find out the history of your school. In groups of two or three, ask your teachers the
following things. Write out their answers. Draw or paste pictures of how your school
looked in the past.:

How old your school is

How many children it started with

Whether it started in this building or somewhere else
Who the first principal was

How many classes there were in the beginning

WEBLINK

ua BR wWN =

A Mahatma called Gandhi: https:/Avww.youtube.com/watch?v=mb5Z6MRBQ3U
(accessed on 27 July 2017)
