The Four Domains of
the Earth

« Topics covered .
e Hydrosphere « Atmosphere « Lithosphere e Biosphere

Talk about this picture. It has things
you can see. It also has things that you
cannot see. Put a circle around the
words that tell you about the picture:

water houses plants air

birds road clouds land

trees car sunlight

Water, air, land and all living things make up the four domains of the earth. A
domain is a region that has its own special features. The four domains of the earth
are the hydrosphere, atmosphere, lithosphere and biosphere. In these four words,
‘-sphere’ used at the end of the word means a region that surrounds a planet. Now
read what these four domains are.

HYDROSPHERE [J

All the water on earth makes up the hydrosphere (hydro=water). As you learnt
earlier, most of the earth’s surface is water. Water is found in three forms—liquid
water, ice and snow and water vapour—the gaseous form of water. When water is
heated, it turns into water vapour. This is called evaporation. When water vapour
cools, it turns back into water. This is called condensation.

re
Evaporation and condensation of water happen
on earth. The sun heats up the water in the
seas. It evaporates and forms clouds. The
clouds move up, where it is very cold. Here the
water vapour in the clouds cools. It changes
back into water. This falls as rain. In very cold places it falls as snow. This is called
precipitation. Some rainwater falls on the seas, lakes and ponds, some seeps into
the ground, and some fills the rivers from where it flows into the sea. The sun again
heats this water. This continuous change of water on earth is called the water cycle.
The diagram explains this to you.

Cold air cools the vapour.
Psi] Ip It falls as rain.
> a od

=
rm fe

Water vapour rises

if

Some water
freezes as snow
in the high
mountains.

Clouds with vapour

eh eee ee ee come de

a been eee ee eee
J
-— =
+
=
=
=
+—_

—— =
Seas and oceans

The water cycle

Water is essential for life to exist on earth.
Living things cannot do without water.

ATMOSPHERE

As you know, the earth is surrounded by a

layer of air called the atmosphere (atmos=vapour or gas). The atmosphere is made
up of many gases. Of these, nitrogen is the most, followed by oxygen. Other gases,
water vapour and carbon dioxide form a very small part of the atmosphere. The
diagram on the next page shows you the composition of the atmosphere.

Nitrogen

™ Oxygen Oxygen is also dissolved in
the water found on land. Fish
® Others, including water and other water creatures

vapour and carbon
dioxide

use this oxygen to survive.

Gases in the earth’s atmosphere

e The atmosphere blocks out the harmful rays of the sun and only lets in rays that
are necessary for living things.

e When we breathe in, we take in oxygen from the air. People and animals need
oxygen to survive. Mantle

Core

LITHOSPHERE [J Crust

The lithosphere is the solid part of the earth
(lithos=stone). The earth has three layers—the
crust, the mantle and the core.

The crust is the outermost part, the surface. It has
water. It also has rocks and the soil that is formed
when rocks break down over many hundreds of The three layers of the earth
years. These form the lithosphere. The mantle

is the next layer. Its upper part is hard rock, which too is part of the lithosphere.
The innermost layer of the earth is the core. It is very hot. It is so hot that the rocks
have melted! The lower part of the mantle, which is next to the core, is also molten
(melted) rock. The molten rocks keep moving all the time, but we usually cannot
feel this movement because it happens very slowly and gradually.

e Many essential things that we need, such as
iron and coal, are found in the rocky layers of
the earth.

e¢ When rocks break down over hundreds of
years, soil is formed. All plants grow in this soil.

BIOSPHERE

The biosphere is the part of the earth’s surface and atmosphere in which plants and
animals can live (bios=life). Living things, from the smallest ones that we cannot see
to big plants and animals, have their own special type of environment in which they
can live and grow. This is called their habitat. The earth has many, many different
kinds of habitats. The great variety of life on earth exists in these different habitats.

Four different
kinds of habitats

in the biosphere—
underwater, jungle,
desert and a
watery one for tiny
organisms that can
only be seen witha
microscope

‘Hydor’ from which we get hydro, ‘atmos’, ‘lithos’ and ‘bios’ are all words from the Greek language.

. =} Values and Life Skills

Q e Can you list two ways in which people depend on the four domains of the earth?
e Why should we take care of these four domains?

REMEMBER @

1. The earth has four domains—the hydrosphere, atmosphere, lithosphere and
biosphere. These make up our environment.

2. The hydrosphere, atmosphere and lithosphere contain numerous habitats.

3. The different habitats are essential for plants and animals to survive.

a region of the earth that has its own special features

Evaporation _ the process of a liquid changing or being changed into a gas

Condensation drops of water that form on a cold surface when warm water
vapour becomes cool

Precipitation —_ rain or snow that falls

Molten melted

Habitat the place where a particular type of animal or plant is normally found

A. Match the following.

A B
1. Hydrosphere the solid part of the earth
2. Atmosphere . the part of the earth’s surface and atmosphere in which
plants and animals live
all the water on earth
the layer of air surrounding the earth

ay

3. Lithosphere
4. Biosphere

a9

B. Fill in the blanks.
1. The gaseous form of water is Called oo... eee eeeeseesee ceneeeseeereeeceseereners

2. THE weceeeccesesesscseeees ceseseseneeeseseseseeeeee keeps circulating the water on earth.
3. People and animals need oxygen to .........:ceeeeeeseeees .
4. The earth has oo... cesses eeeeees layers. 1
2 [ce
5. Ws place Murals a particular type of Pee pordodal:
animal or plant is normally found is v. IN|
Called its... teseeeeeeeeeees . A} |p| 3
P/E! [N|
C. Crossword e . I
In your notebook, write clues for this Al |A| RR)
crossword. LS HS LS HL et
I 4 I 4 G +
D. Choose the correct answer. 0. 2 | E

1. Water is found in four/three forms.
2. The largest amount of a gas in the atmosphere is nitrogen/oxygen.

3. The innermost part of the earth is hard/molten rock.
4. The earth has many different/only a few habitats.
5. Life is found on the surface/mantle of the earth.

E. Answer the following questions.

Why is the water on earth essential?

Give two ways in which the atmosphere is useful.

How is the lithosphere useful? Write in two or three sentences.
Write a short paragraph to explain how the biosphere depends on the other three
domains of the earth.

5. Give three examples of habitats found on earth.

BRWN

THINGS TO DO

GI A. Picture study
1. What does this diagram SHOW? ..........csceesseseceseeseseseseseesenesaeensesene

2. Label the blanks in \ p oo
the diagram. — f \O Cc Suny
3. Colour it if you wish. { ) -—> “ts »
-\ }* condensation Me L J
B. On your own NUK aoe
Keep a week’s diary to record / A \ precipitation
the daily changes you notice op 0

in the earth’s domains in the evaporation 0 ae

surroundings around your

house. There may be changes ° =
in the atmosphere and the — 7
biosphere and also in the —————

hydrosphere if there is any
water in the area. There may not be changes in the lithosphere.

GC. Ina group
Working in small groups, put together a presentation on a chart, a scrapbook or as a
PowerPoint to explain the four domains of the earth.

WEBLINK

The four spheres: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5FooHD0Oatuc (accessed on 27
July 2017)

C—O

