« Topicscovered .

e Various sources of history ® The need to preserve sources of history

This picture shows two sides of a coin. Write the information you get from it:
The country it belongs to: «0.0... eee eeeeeeeeeeee

The value of the COIN: «00... es eeseeseeeeeeeeeeneees

The year in which it was Made: ............eeeeeeseeees

The languages USEC: ...........seesccseseeesseereeeeneeeesnens

VARIOUS SOURCES OF HISTORY [J

Like this coin, coins of earlier times also give information. They are clues that tell us
something about the past. Coins and other such clues are called the sources
of history.

Many things have happened and
millions of people have lived on earth
before us. They have left many different
types of clues. If there are many
sources—many clues—historians get a
full picture of that period. If there are
just a few sources, we get only some idea of that particular time. We learn about
the past on/y through the sources of history that experts have been able to study
and understand.

The main sources of history

Coins Artefacts and monuments Written material Oral sources

Coins
Coins give a lot of information:

e The name or picture on a coin tells historians which ruler or king had the coin
made.

e The date tells them when he ruled.

e The writing on the coin tells them
which language was used at that time.

e If the coin is made of gold or silver, they
learn that the kingdom was wealthy.

The earliest coins were not very well
made. They were just bits of metal with
deep marks. Coin-making got better over
the centuries.

Old coins

Didyoue 4
Know™

The earliest coins in India were mostly of silver. The metal was heated to soften it. Designs
like the sun, trees, hills and various animals were pressed (punched) on to them. These coins

are called ‘punch-marked’ coins.

Artefacts and Monuments

Things made and used by earlier people are called artefacts. Household goods,
things made of clay like dishes or toys, jewellery and coins are some artefacts that
have been found. The study of such artefacts, and of the buildings of early times, is

known as archaeology. An expert in archaeology is an archaeologist.
: a
From artefacts, archaeologists learn how people
lived in earlier times. For example, a clay toy
with wheels tells archaeologists that the people
knew how to use clay to make toys. They

can also guess that the people may have had
vehicles with wheels.

Very often artefacts are buried underground.
Archaeologists uncover them by digging very
carefully. In some places, they have found
whole towns buried underground!

A clay toy from ancient Greece

| People have also left behind buildings

i which can still be seen. These historical
buildings are called monuments.
Historians learn a great deal from such
monuments.

idyoUn

now!

Archaeologists work very carefully so that
buried artefacts are not damaged—sometimes
they use brushes.

The pyramids of Egypt have been standing The Taj Mahal in Agra is nearly 400 years old.
for over 4,600 years! The writings, paintings It is decorated with precious stones, which
and artefacts inside the pyramids tell us alot __ tells us that the ruler who built it, Shah Jahan,

about the ancient Egyptians. was very wealthy.

dyou
Daye ww

FT FEST ATTA Os
Written records or, written material, are ea: aaa faery eaesy Aer

writings from early times. Sometimes these TT ASAT AAT T TAT OP AA
are in a language like Sanskrit that people Par faciers Soars Fee:

can read. Many ancient Indian books are An example of Sanskrit writing
written in Sanskrit.

= ne = Sometimes ancient writings are in a language
4 eC 7 =! which nobody can read. In such cases experts
A NtF i xf have to work very hard to understand the
pet a) | has writing. It is like trying to read a secret writing.
| | oe or ee . .
mast | banana Written records are of different types:
: = fae et YP
ae a 1. Sometimes a king or someone else in
eats ok his court (the people around him) wrote

The writing arth the ancient Egyptians—after a about his rule. This is how we know a lot
lot of work, experts were able to read this. about Indian rulers like Babur and Akbar.

A page from Hiuen Tsang
the book, called came to India
Baburnama, that from China more
Babur wrote—in than 1,300 years
it he says that he ago. He came to
became a ruler study Buddhism,

when he was 12 the religion
years old—just a that follows the
little older than teachings of
“you! Babur loved Buddha who had
nature. He has lived in India.
described the His writings
animals and plants give a lot of
of India. Such information
paintings are also about India of
sources of history. that time.

paar Discuss <>

"| Which animals are shown inthe \ — ‘
4 page from the Baburnama? ?

a

2. People who were not rulers wrote
about their lives or about the
times in which they lived. Some

: _ Early writings were not always on paper. In India,
foreign visitors wrote about the

~ palm leaves were used. In Europe and West Asia,
places that they visited. Many writing material called parchment made from

visitors to India described the sheepskin or goatskin, was used.
things that they saw; their writings
are an important source of information about India’s history.

3. Religious books also give some idea of earlier times. For example, the Vedas
(pronounced Veds) are Hindu religious books written by early people called the
Aryans. They help us to understand how the Aryans lived.

4. Written records are also found on rocks,
stones or metals. These are called
inscriptions. They give historians information
too. We have learnt about the great Indian
ruler Ashoka, who was born over 2,300 years
ago, through such inscriptions.

Oral Sources—Stories, Songs and Poems

When your family talked to you about their early
life, you learnt a part of your family history.
Similarly, people have told stories verbally
(through spoken words) about their lives. These
are called oral sources. Songs, poems or folk tales
that tell us about people’s lives or of historical
events, are also oral sources. From these,
historians learn about things which may not be
found in written records.

i

THE NEED TO PRESERVE SOURCES Inscriptions on a pillar put up by Ashoka

We learn about the past only through the sources of history. Every source can tell a
story. By looking at sources carefully and trying to understand them, archaeologists
and historians get a picture of the people and events of the past. This is why
everybody should realize how important it is to take care of a// historical sources.
Archaeologists, historians and other people all need to look after historical sources.
For example, in times of war, museums that preserve a lot of historical sources are

in danger. People who worked at such museums at that time, hid their artefacts and
brought them out again when peace returned. They preserved knowledge for us all.

| © Values and Life Skills

on
rm

= Ordinary people can look after historical sources.
¢ How can we respect historical buildings and monuments?

e What should we do with old photographs, letters and papers? Are they waste materials,
or are they useful?

i

a

li OS |
REMEMBER poly
1. We get information about the past through the sources of history. If there are
many sources we get a good idea about a period; just a few sources means that
we get an incomplete idea about a period.
2. We know about the past only through the sources of history which historians and
archaeologists have studied and understood.
3. The main sources of history are: coins, artefacts and monuments, written records
and oral sources.
4. It is essential that we respect and look after the sources of history.

Q WORDS
W) Clue something that helps to find the answer to a problem, or to know
the truth

Artefact something made and used by earlier people like tools, pottery etc.

Archaeology _ the study of past human beings and their lives by finding and
examining their buildings, tools, dishes, etc.

Court the group of people who attend to or are followers of a king or prince
Inscriptions — writing on coins, monuments, stone or metal

Verbally through spoken words and not through writing or actions

Preserve keep something safe or in good condition; make something stay the same
EXERCISES

A. Fill in the blanks.

Copy the following table on sources of history in your notebook and complete it by
filling the blanks.

Lo ceeeeesececceseseseeeees 2. Artefacts and 3. Written records | 4. ..eecceseccseeseseseees
monuments a Blo cnonsasasaacacasasasa06:
A. scsesesecsesesesesenees D. cccccceseseressesenene Do vesssesettetttsetstee
b. Jewellery Cu cecececececssescescesees Co sesereesereseserersecens
Co ceseseseeseceseeasonse . |d. Inscriptions ob Tnallsctikes

B. Write true or false.
Correct the false sentences in your notebook.
1. Old coins are not of much use to historians.
2. Archaeological remains may be above the ground or underground.
3. The writings of Babur and Hiuen Tsang have given us information about India of
earlier times.
4. We cannot read Sanskrit in which early Indian books are written.
5. The Vedas help us to understand how the Aryans lived.
6. We should look after only those historical sources that are important.

C. Match the following.

A B
Oral sources a. writing on metal, stone or rocks
Monuments b. things like dishes and tools made by earlier people
Artefacts c. old buildings of historical interest
Archaeology d. stories, songs, poems
Inscription e. the study of artefacts and monuments of earlier times

Om bBwWwWNH —

D. Choose the correct answers.
1. The earliest coins were not very well made/were beautiful gold and silver coins.
2. Buried artefacts can be dug out by gardeners/have to be removed very carefully.
3. Written records are always easy to read/may be difficult to read.
4. Oral sources are carefully written down/only told verbally.

E. Answer the following questions.
1. Why are sources of history important?
2. Explain why sources of history are like clues.

be
3. Why do archaeologists use brushes when searching for artefacts?

From which place did Hiuen Tsang come to India? Why did he come?

5. Explain how the information from oral sources can be different from information
found in written records.

6. Why is it important to preserve and care for the sources of history?

>

THINGS TO DO

0A. Picture study

Some written records are damaged and
historians have to guess what they say.
Look at this writing on a damaged piece of
paper and work out what it says.

B. On your own

1. Visit the history in your city.
If your town has monuments or museums that tell about the past, visit them. Take a
notebook to record your visit.

e Atthe museum, find out what historical artefacts it has and learn more
about them.
¢ Ata monument, find out when it was built and why.

2. What old items are there in your family? Bring one or two to class and share their
history.

GC. Ina group

1. The Clue Bag Game for two or more teams:
Your teacher will have a bag with ‘sources of history’ like coins, books, letters,
parts of some toys, bits of pottery and other similar things. As your teacher shows
each object, take turns to guess what the source tells you. Whichever team makes
good guesses scores two points for each clue.
2. Bring old coins and postage stamps to class. Have an exhibition. Discuss what can
be learnt from them.

WEBLINK

GB Archaeologist at work: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x9pGbpIPU-Y
(accessed on 27 July 2017)

Folk song from Himachal Pradesh: https:/Awww.youtube.com/watch?v=jnSFLQkXIFs
(accessed on 27 July 2017)

