« Topics covered .

* Civicsense @ Whoisaneighbour? ¢ Placesaroundus_ ® Elections

~

yi

Look at these pictures and tick the sentences that you agree with.
e The children have tried to solve a problem that is affecting many people.
e They know that they should care about the place where they study.

CIVIC SENSE

These children saw a problem affecting many people and tried to solve it. They
have civic sense which means a sense of responsibility towards the people and
places around us.

wae D
Responsibility means a duty to take care of sCUSS ia
somebody or something. Citizens have duties How does ‘civic sense’ apply to

and responsibilities towards: students while they are in school?
—<

e their neighbours and other people.
e the place where they live, study or work—the neighbourhood, city and country.
e the environment (you will read about this in a later chapter).

: : ¢ rules and laws—for example, school rules or the rules on how to keep roads safe.
7]
WHO IS A NEIGHBOUR?

Neighbours are people who live close by. Sometimes these are known people, but
sometimes they may be unknown people. There are many other people whom we do
not know, like fellow travellers in a bus or train. How should we behave towards them?

Read this story:

Two men lay badly injured by the side of the road. Many people passed that way

in cars, auto-rickshaws, buses and other vehicles. No one stopped to help them.
Eventually a man in a car stopped. He did not know the injured men but he put them
in his car and took them to a hospital so that they could be treated for their injuries.

We should be kind and helpful to people we know =
but we should also be kind, helpful and caring
towards other people. This is what a good citizen
does and it is the true meaning of being a good
neighbour. Good neighbours think and care about
other people. For example: does someone need
help? Will our actions upset someone else? If we
think only about ourselves, we cannot be good
neighbours. The people who passed the injured
men without helping them did not think about
them. They thought only about themselves.

THE PLACES AROUND US

Places like roads, parks, hospitals, buses and trains Helping an injured man

are owned by the government but they belong to

each one of us. They are public property. Monuments too belong to all of us as
they are our heritage. Look at the pictures on the next page of how monuments and
public property are treated sometimes:

A monument on which
people have scribbled

The Archaeological Survey of India
looks after heritage monuments,
but they find it difficult to prevent
people from writing on monuments.

e Why do people burn public property when
they are angry?

e Who are the people affected by such actions?

You have learnt how important it is to look
after historical buildings and monuments. It

is also important to look after public rey
that belongs to us all. iz

Belongings like our homes, books or clothes
are our private property. People take care
of their private property. Your school may
be private property too as it may not belong
to the government. Just as we take care of
our own things, private property that belongs to anyone else should be respected
and taken care of. For example, it is the responsibility of students and people in the
school to look after and be careful about school property.

A private school

It is the civic duty of al// citizens to take care of public and private property. When
they do so, they are good citizens.

> ELECTIONS

Find out how an election works by choosing a
class captain.

e Divide the class into three groups. Each group chooses a child who would make a
good captain. This is their candidate.

e The candidates and their groups think about why he or she would make a good captain.

¢ On election day, each candidate makes a speech saying why he or she would
make a good captain.

e After this, your teacher will help you to hold an election to choose a class captain.

e When everyone has voted, the candidate who gets the most votes becomes the
class captain.

India has governments in villages, towns or cities, the states and in New Delhi. Each
of these governments is chosen by the people through voting in an election, just as
you voted in class.

A citizen of India who is of 18 years
or above has the right to vote. To be
able to vote, such people have to
register as voters with the Election
Commission.

In many places, voters go to vote in
large numbers during an election,
but in some other places, very few
people vote. Some reasons for this
could be: they may not be registered ™
as voters; they may find it difficult to
reach the polling booth (the place
where they vote); or they may decide not to vote.

Queues of voters outside polling booths

It is an important civic duty of citizens to make sure that
they can vote and also that they do vote on election day.

By following rules and carrying out civic duties and
responsibilities, we can all be good citizens.

‘Sg Values and Life Skills

Q [ Why is it important for us to remember and do our civic duties at all times?

_

(>
(7)
Yl A

REMEMBER Se’

1. Citizens have a responsibility to be caring and thoughtful towards others.

2. Citizens also have a responsibility to take care of public and private property.

3. All Indian citizens who are 18 years and above should vote in elections.

4. Good citizens obey and follow rules.

Responsibility a duty to take care of somebody or something

Citizen a person who has the right to belong to a particular country

Public property land, buildings, transport, etc. that are owned by the

government and can be used by everyone

Private property property belonging to a particular person or group

Candidate a person who stands for election

Polling booth the place where voters go to vote in an election

A. Fill in the blanks.
1. A good citizen cares for known people and also for ..........cceeeeeeees people.

2. Facilities such as roads, buses and parks, which are for everyone, are

eC mevareveceanereneveevavenen

3. Heritage like historical buildings and .........scesessesseeees belongs to everyone.
4. We should respect and take care of bOtH 00... ee seeeeeeeees 0
property.

5. It is the duty of Indian citizens of 18 years and above to Vote iN oo... esseceeseeeeees .

B. Good citizenship

Tick sentences that show good citizenship. Put a cross against the ones that show a
lack of civic sense.

1. After a picnic, people throw their garbage in a dustbin or carry it home to throw in
a dustbin.

2. People in a vehicle spit from the windows.

3. Acar drives fast through a puddle of water, splashing dirty water on the nearby
pedestrians.

4. A group of students help during their break to see that no one throws garbage on
the playground.

5. Some students use school furniture to play cricket in empty classrooms.

6. People in a building are careful not to make any noise after 10 pm so that they do
not disturb neighbours.

7. Older children in a park play on swings meant for children of less than 5 years

of age.
8. ne using a public toilet in a theatre or an airport, people make sure that it is
left clean.
C. Match the following.
A B
1. Citizen a. a duty to take care of somebody or something

a

2. Responsibility a person who stands for election

3. Candidate c. teaches rights and duties of a citizen and the way
government works

4. Civics d. a person who belongs to a country or city

D. Answer the following questions.
What do we learn in civics?

Who is a good neighbour?

Why should we take care of historical buildings and monuments?
What is the difference between public and private property?
Who are the people who are allowed to vote in India?

Noh WN

Write three sentences to explain who a good citizen is.

THINGS TO DO

A. Picture study
Discuss:

e How such children’s libraries

are useful.

e How we can show civic sense
when we use the books and the

library.

B. On your own

1. Look around your neighbourhood
and school for 2-3 days. Are
people breaking rules? Are there
any places where people show
civic sense? Make a list and share

it in class.

2. Find out when the last elections were held in your city and state.

C. Ina group

1. List the public and private property around your school in a table like this one:

Public property

Private property

2. List some rules (a) at home; (b) in school that you should follow so that you are a

good citizen.

3. Plan a programme, using posters or short skits, to make other classes aware of how
important it is to keep surroundings clean.

WEBLINK

Being A Good Citizen: https:/Avww.youtube.com/watch?v=3bwfo9aD5A8 &list=PL6tCl
jHCEBI5-dAZsRxFdPHQy7mi7UdzT (accessed on 27 July 2017)

eee

