Human Body:
Food We Eat

All living things need food to stay
alive. Food gives us strength to work
and play. It helps us to grow and
remain healthy and strong. It is also
needed for the repair of different
parts of the body. It protects us
against diseases.

@) What does food contain?

@) Components of food

@) Balanced diet

@) Avoiding wastage of food

® Care for plants and our environment

Plants and animals are the two main sources of food. We get vegetables,
cereals, pulses, fruits, seeds, and oil from plants. We get meat, fish, milk, and eggs
from animals. We should eat these foods in the right amounts to stay healthy.

> What Does Food Contain?

Nutrients are the substances present in our food that help living organisms to
grow and survive. Different nutrients have different functions.

Some nutrients give us energy to do work, some are required for the proper
growth and repair of the body, while some protect us from diseases.

Let us now study in detail about food and the nutrients that are present in
our food.

> Components of Food

Different food items are rich in different nutrients. There are five main nutrients
found in our food: carbohydrates, proteins, fats, vitamins, and minerals. Apart
from these nutrients, our body also needs a good amount of roughage

and water.

Carbohydrates

Carbohydrates provide energy to our body. Food ifems that are rich in
carbohydrates are called energy-giving foods. We need carbohydrates in
large quantities. The two main types of carbohydrates are sugar and starch.
Fruits such as bananas
and apples are good
sources of sugar.
Potatoes and cereals
(such as rice, wheat,
and maize) are good A
sources of starch. Foods rich in sugar Foods rich in starch

Carbohydrate-rich foods

Proteins

Proteins are the nutrients that help in the growth
and repair of our body. They also help in building
our muscles. Foods that are rich sources of
proteins are called body-building foods.

Young children should include more protein-rich
foods in their diet! because their bodies are still
growing.

Protein-rich foods

Milk and milk products (such as home-made cheese and paneer), pulses,
sprouts, soya bean, meat, fish, and eggs are rich sources of proteins.

Fats

Fats are the nutrients that provide more
energy to our body than carbohydrates.
They help to keep our body warm. Foods
that are rich sources of fats are called
energy-giving foods.

Oil and nuts are examples of fat-rich foods.
Ghee and butter (milk products) are also
fat-rich foods.

Fat-rich foods

Our body requires only a little amount of fat. Excess fat consumed by us is
stored in our body for future use. Too much intake of fat can make us obese?.
People engaged in heavy physical activities, such as labourers, need to include
more carbohyadrate- and fat-rich foods in their diet. This will provide them with
sufficient energy to do work.

'diet: the kind of food we eat regularly
2obese: fat or overweight

oe
sitting, \IFE

_ Activity |

Aim: To grow sprouts from whole seeds Caan O

Ses
' Materials required: Dry whole seeds of gram or mung, a bowl, and a cloth

| Procedure:

: 1. Wash and soak the seeds in water for a day.
: 2. Drain the excess water, and keep the soaked seeds in a bowl.
: 3. Cover the bow! with a wet cloth. Make sure that the cloth does not get dry.

i

: 4. Note your observations affer 2 or 3 days.
' Observation: You will see that a white structure has emerged from the seed.

: Conclusion: The small white structure in seed is

: called sprout. It indicates that germination of the
seeds has taken place. Sprouted seeds are highly
rich in protein. We should include them in our diet.

| Extension: Chop tomatoes, onions, and coriander

' leaves. Mix them to the sprouts and add lemon ~
| juice to it. Sprinkle salt and pepper on it. Your —
nutritious sprout salad is ready.

me e

Vitamins and Minerals

Vitamins and minerals are the
nutrients that protect our body from
diseases and keep us fit and healthy.
These nutrients are required in small
amounts. Foods that are rich sources
of vitamins and minerals are called
protective foods.

A,B, C, D, E, and K are the different
types of vitamins found in our diet.
Calcium, potassium, iodine, and iron are some of the minerals in our diet.

Fruits and vegetables are rich
sources of vitamins and minerals.

Different vitamins and minerals have different roles to play within the body.

® Green vegetables, carrots, sweet potatoes, eggs, and dairy products are rich
in vitamin A, which improves eyesight and maintains healthy skin.

® Milk, fish, and eggs are rich in vitamin D, which is important for healthy bones
and teeth.

oie
@ Calcium and iron are examples of minerals needed by our body.
© Calcium is needed for the formation sisiaisalaileiailadatieisiaialabieiais:
of bones and teeth. Milk, curd, and Think and Discuss _3e
home-made cheese are rich sources of || Why is home-made cheese
calcium. preferred over packed
© Iron is needed for the formation of _ cheese?
blood.Green leafy vegetables (suchas =#8—<“i‘(SUWW!*~*~*~™”
spinach), strawberries, and watermelons are rich sources of iron.
@ Other important minerals required by our body are iodine, potassium, and
sodium.

Spinach, strawberries, and

Milk is a good source of calcium. watermelons are good sources of iron.

Roughage and Water

Some part of the food that we eat does not
get digested completely. The part of the food
that cannot be digested by our body is called
roughage. It is also important for us as it adds
bulk to our food and allows waste material to
pass out of our body easily.

- Sources of roughage
y 4 mal Water is an essential part of our diet. It is important
™~ H for digestion and is an essential part of the blood
~ and other body fluids. We must drink plenty of water
ri everyday. We should also make sure that the water we

drink is clean. Otherwise, we may fall ill.

ee

Water is essential for
the proper functioning
of our body.
> Balanced Diet imc

A balanced diet is a diet that contains all the nutrients in the right
amounts, along with roughage WWW _
and water. It is important to eat a _Fact File |
balanced diet for proper growth and Milk is considered a complete food, -
development of our body. We should Soninconiaine very little iron. '
eat a balanced diet that includes ea ee ww. .
required amounts of food items like

(i) cereals (ii) pulses and sprouts (iii) green leafy vegetables (iv) milk and milk
products (v) oils and nuts (vi) locally available vegetables and fruits in plenty
(vii) eggs, fish, and chicken. Vegetarians can derive most of the necessary

nutrients from cereals, pulses, and a milk-based diet.

Different groups of people require different amounts and kinds of food. It
depends on the age and the amount of physical activity of a person. Some
examples are given below:

® A person who does more
physical labour (such as
an athlete or a labourer)
needs a diet that is richer in
carbohydrates in comparison
to a person who sits and works
in an office. A person working
in an office should have a diet
low in fats to avoid gaining
weight.

@ Growing children need a
protein-rich diet that helps in
the overall development of
their bodies and minds. They
should also have more of protective foods like fruits and vegetables.

@ Elderly persons usually need a low-fat, high-fibre diet.To meet their need of
vitamins and minerals, they should also have milk and milk products, fresh
fruits, and vegetables.

Balanced diet

ote
er, |

: Questions |

eee eee ere rere eer eee ere ree

A. Give two examples for the following.
1. Essential substances present in the fOOd oo... eeeceeceeeeeeeete cee eee tees teen eee nena
2. Main types of carbohydrates he eeeeeceteeeeeeteeeeee  teeteeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees
3. Body-ouilding fO0dS aeeeeetettttt tet ttteie teeeeeteeeaeeneeeneees :
4. Main nutrients in protective fOOd he eeecececeeeeneeeeeeey  teeteeee eee eeeeeeeeaaes :
B. Fill in the blanks with suitable words.
1. Young children should include More ..........ccccceeees foods in their diet. |
2. Fats provide more energy than .........:::cseeeeeeee eee . |
Gb ooscaonnonngMeooooc is needed for the formation of bones and teeth.
Wl lect is the essential part of the blood and other body fluids.
5. lron is needed for the formation Of ...........:c . :

© eee eee ee ee ee ee eee eee ee eee ee eee eee eee eee ee eee eee eee

> Avoiding Wastage of Food °: ae
o

Food is necessary for our survival. We should not BIS

waste food. By avoiding wastage of food, we can feed

a lot of starving people. We should take the following steps to avoid

wastage of food:

® Take small servings of food during meals so that you can finish everything on
the plate.

® Avoid cooking a large quantity
of food.

® Store cooked food in the a 4)
refrigerator to avoid spoilage.

= 7
e Raw vegetables and fruits . [ 4
should preferably be kept in as |

the refrigerator (especially
during summers).

® Avoid exposure of cut fruits and
vegetables to air for a long
time.

® Parents should teach children
not to waste food.

Food stored properly,
inside a refrigerator

ve
Food gets spoilt when it is not stored properly. Eating spoilt food is unhealthy
and can make us sick. Some methods of preserving food are given below.

Pickling |n this method, fruits and vegetables are mixed with salt and oil. An
example is the pickling of mango and garlic.

Drying |n this method, water is
removed from the food.The food is
then kept in an airtight container.
An example is the drying of chillies
in the sun.

Refrigeration Cooked food items, Preserved foods
vegetables, and fruits are kept inside the refrigerator at a low temperature.

Deep freezing |In this method, foods like fish, meat, and seafood are kept at a
very low temperature.

ge ayy
aaa aaaa tae aeaa aaa G5 fst © amt
— "ast:

‘ People from different parts of India migrate to metro cities in the hope of better job

| opportunities, quality education, healthcare facilities, and an urban lifestyle. Due to
: the continuous increase in mixed culture, the food and beverage industry has seen :
' a significant rise. They contribute significantly to food waste due to overproduction

‘ and sometimes inefficient storage conditions.

‘ Based on the above information, answer the following questions:

a. What is the reason of food wastage in the given situation?

b. What measures can we take at our level to avoid food wastage? List any
two points.

c. Explain one method that can be used to avoid food waste, especially in
restaurants and large social events.

Case Study |

i is i a i

> Care for Plants and our Environment 9 Pt
= © iw
Plants are very important for us. Sass

® They provide us food as well as other plant products like fibres for making
cloth, wood for paper, medicines, and timber.

® Their most important function is to give us fresh air containing oxygen.
® They bind the soil, and thus prevent soil from being carried away.

Therefore, we should take care of plants. We should avoid cutting of trees in
large numbers. We should plant saplings, irrigate them, and add sufficient

oe
manure whenever necessary,
so that they grow properly
and bear healthy fruits and
vegetables.

Apart from a healthy and
balanced diet, we also need

a clean, green, and healthy
environment so that we remain fit
and free from diseases.

Ways to make our environment
clean

® Reduce pollution of air, water,
and soil.

® Avoid dumping garbage on roadsides and in your neighbourhood.
®) Reduce the use of plastics.
e)
@)

Growing a plant

Do not cut trees, as they are the ‘green lungs’ of the Earth.
Plant more and more trees.

:@ Nutrients are the substances present in different food items that are needed for
i good health and proper growth of our body.

The five main nutrients found in our food are carbohydrates, proteins, fats,
vitamins, and minerals. Roughage and water are also present in our food.

Carbohydrates provide energy to the body.

Proteins help in the growth and repair of our body, and in building our muscles.
Fats provide more energy than carbohydrates and keep our body warm.
Vitamins and minerals protect our body from diseases.

Roughage is the part of food that cannot be digested and helps to remove
waste materials from our body.

Water carries nutrients from the food to different parts of our body, helps in
digestion, and is an essential part of the blood and other body fluids.

@ A balanced diet contains all nutrients in right amounts, along with roughage
and water.

' @ We should not waste food and should follow the necessary steps to avoid
1 spoilage and wastage of food.

@

@eeee

e@

%

omer

SECTION I

(A) Choose the correct option.
1.

7 eee

= *.

hee a *

‘ Exercises |

Which of the following is/are the function(s) of food?
a. Food gives us strength to work and play.

b. Food helps us to grow.

c. Food helps us to remain healthy and strong.

d. All of these

pemite, REMY, erlting

et @

Which of the following substances help in removing waste from our body?

a. Carbohydrates b. Roughage c. Vitamins d. Proteins

. Which of the following minerals are required by our body?

a. Calcium b. lodine c. Iron
Which of the following types of food help in building our muscles?
a. Protein-rich foods b. Energy-giving foods
c. Vitamins and minerals d. Roughage and water
In which of the following methods, we keep raw peas at a very low

temperature?
a. Deep freezing b. Canning and bottling

c. Pickling d. Refrigeration

Assertion and Reasoning questions.

1.

2.

Assertion (A): Food rich in carbohydrates are energy-giving foods.

Reason (R): Carbohydrates provide energy to our body.
a. Both A and R are True b. Both A and R are False
c. Ais True and Ris False d. Ais False and R is True

Assertion (A): Body-builiding foods, such as meat, fish, eggs, and beans,

are essential for our body.

Reason (R): These foods help in keeping our body warm.
a. Both A and R are True b. BothA and R are False
c. Ais True and Ris False d. Ais False and R is True

cy» Choose the correct word to fill in the blanks.

1.
2.

solgsocoscooscesccecccosogMfecooce (Oil/Potaio) is a rich source of fat.
Egg is o rich SOUrCE Of 00... eeceeceeeeeeeeeeee eee een ees (energy/protein).

d. All of these
3. ROUQNAGE 00... ee (can be/cannot be) digested by our

body.

4, Cooked food should be KEPT oo. ete etetereeneeenees (covered/
uncovered).

5. Mango is preserved by .......0.::ccceeeeeeeeeeeeee eee eeees (pickling/cleaning).

(D> Name the following.

1. The substances needed for energy, maintaining health,
and propergrowthofourbody 0 hiddttttttttttteeeetes '

2. Foods thatare rich source of protein ata aeeetaterttttseees

3. A diet containing all the nutrients in the right amounts,
along withroughage and water haeeetttttttttttttteees i

4. The method of food preservation in which water is '
removed fromthe food vttttetttttettetitee

5. Foodsrichinvitamins and minerals i haneetttttettttttteees '

SECTION Il

eriting tsig
‘Ey Short answers questions.
1. Why do we need food?
Define nutrients.
Name the five types of nutrients.
Name two foods rich in Iron.

Amit’s doctor has advised him to add more roughage to his diet. Explain
the role of roughage in our body.

Why should we drink enough water everyday?
7. Why do young children need more protein-zich food in their diet?
8. Why do we need to store food properly?

ak WN

o&

(Fy Long answer questions.
1. Suppose your school has announced a picnic next week. Name some
food items that will give you enough energy to keep playing all day.
Which group do these food items belong to?
2. Rishi loves to watch superhero movies and wants to become strong and
healthy like them. Think and write about how certain foods protect your
body. Give examples of these protective foods.

er

*eseat® . * . i

3. Ashima has asked her parents to organise a party for her birthday. Write
three simple steps that she can take fo ensure the food does not go to waste.

4. Abhir’s grandmother loves gardening. She even encourages Abhir to take
care of plants at their home and in the neighbourhood. Why do you think
it is crucial for us to care of the plants around us? Think and write some of
the practical ways we can follow to help plants grow and stay healthy in
our community.

et ee ee eee eee eee eee een,
*
ee eee eee ee eee eee

Y u
wee, ght,

oer rrneenrear teeter came mea (1?) @- &,

Look at the picture of the breakfast served on the table. Write the names of the
food items shown. Mention any one major nutrient present in each food item.

Major nutrient

Food item
' present
QuBlEcp LIFE NALUES ART ag PUN, BEMing
a [b ---- = . - -- = Y= .-
a 7 @2@e tz
‘ My Learning Corner : @ é p > 1.

reeaeF SKILLS Pega

(A> Think about
1. We should drink milk daily. why?
(Hint. Which of the nutrients does milk contain?)
2. Why should children take a protein-rich diet?

Try out
1. Write a short story based on avoiding wastage of food in 100-150 words.
You could also try to type the story on computer.
2. Collect any five empty food packets that are usually thrown away in the
dustbin. Cut out the parts of the packets where the name of the food item

_ See eee eee eee eee eee eee,

and its nutrients are printed. Paste the cuttings in your Science Scrapbook. ;
Note down the names of the food items and the nutrients each contains,
in the format given below.

Packet cutting Name of the food Nutrients

| 3. Interact with a dietician and discuss what you should eat during your

: growing age. Also plan a weekly diet chart with his/her help.

4. Visit a nearby park with your mother, carrying along a notebook and

a pencil. Interact with the gardener and find out the names of different
: trees in the park. Also enquire, which of the ornamental plants does he
grow during different seasons. Ask him how he takes care of the plants,
? like what is the irrigation process, how to add manure, and the method
of protection from pests. Make a project on ‘Plant Care’ based on the
information you have collected. You can also take pictures of the area
| and the plants, and paste them in your Project file.

5. Ona political map of India shade the states, as mentioned below.
a. Wheat-producing states—in orange
b. Rice-producing states—in blue
c. Maize-producing states—in red

en re ee re ee ee eee eee =

Se eee

| Self-Assessment |

Now that you have completed the chapter, score each of the following tasks from
1 to 5 to indicate how well you can do them.

' Score 5 =! can definitely do this.
? Score 1 =| cannot do this yet.
tc |My score
/ @ explain what nutrients are and its types.
: © explain the components of food.

e explain balanced diet.

: © list the ways to avoid wastage of food.

; © explain how plants are important to us and the steps ;
involved in taking care of them.

Worksheet

Complete the Word Puzzle given below based on the clues provided.

1

Across
3. Food that is a rich source of vitamin D

4. Tne nutrient that provides more energy than carbohydrates
5. Energy-giving food that is needed in large quantities
9. Calcium iS O ........ ce ceeeee neces .

10. Nutrient that helps in growth and repair of the body

Down
1. A food that is a good source of iron

2. The essential part of blood and other body fluids is .............:cceeeeeees .
6. The part of food that cannot be digested by our body

7. Nutrient present in protective foods

8. Bones and teeth are made up Of ........: eee .

| foo
