(3) Human Body: Digestive and
S” Excretory Systems |

Human beings take in food through the mouth.
They bite and chew their food using their teeth.

The digestive system breaks down the food ® Digestive system

further into simpler forms to release nutrients ® Excretory system

that are used by the body. ® Healthy habits related to
© digestion

© excretion

> Digestive System

The process by which food is broken down into a simpler form so that if can be
easily taken in or absorbed by our body is called digestion. Many organs! work
together and help in the process of digestion. The mouth, food pipe, stomach,
small and large intestines, liver,
pancreas, rectum, and anus are the
main organs of the digestive system.
Let us learn about the role of each
organ in the process of digestion.

Mouth
Food pipe

Mouth Digestion starts in the mouth.
Tne teeth help to break down and
chew food.The chewed food then
mixes with a liquid, called saliva,
produced by the salivary glands

Liver — ‘ — Stomach

— Pancreas

present in our mouth. Saliva makes _ Large
the food softer and easier to swallow. el intestine
The tongue helps in the proper Rectum
mixing of saliva with the food. Anus
Food pipe Through the food pipe Diagrammatic representation of the

(oesophagus), the food passes from human digestive system
the mouth to the stomach.

lorgan: a part of the body that carries out a specific function
Stomach Inside the stomach, the food is
broken down further into smaller pieces by §
churning? and with the help of chemicals = The muscles of the food pipe

called digestive juices. » contract and relax to create

. . ' a wave called peristalsis that
Liver and Pancreas The liverand pancreas pushes the food down the pipe.

produce digestive juices which enter the small -__
intestine, and help in further digestion of food.

Small intestine From the stomach, the food passes into the small intestine. The
small intestine is a long and hollow tube-like structure that produces digestive
juices. Digestion is completed in the small intestine and the useful nutrients
from the food are absorbed into the blood. Blood then carries these nutrients to
different parts of the body.

Large intestine From the small intestine, the undigested food passes into the
large intestine. The large intestine is a shorter but wider, tube-like structure, which
collects the indigestible food from the small intestine. The large intestine absorbs
water from this undigested food and forms waste products called faeces.

Rectum Rectum is the final part of the large intestine. Faeces are stored in the
rectum for a short time before being passed out through the anus.

Anus Faeces are removed from the body through the anus.

Need for Chewing Food Well

We must eat our food slowly and chew it well. Chewing breaks down the food
into smaller particles. Digestion of carbohydrate starts in the mouth, where
smaller particles of food mix with saliva. Saliva contains enzymes that help in
digestion. Mixing of food with saliva in the mouth also liquefies it partially, so
that it becomes easier to digest it.

If we do not chew our food properly, large food particles will reach our
stomach, and take a longer time to digest. Hence, digestion may not occur
properly and nutrients from the food may not be released completely for
absorption into the body.

Well-chewed food and a healthy digestive system help in the formation of
proper faeces. This leads to a regular bowel movement by which our body
gets rid of toxins and waste materials that are inside. Regular bowel movement
prevents digestive disorders and helps us stay healthy.

2churning: a strong spinning movement

ove
Need for Water

Drinking water is vital for life. We should drink nearly eight glasses of water every
day. It is especially important for our digestive system. If we do not drink enough
water, absorption of food and nutrients in the intestine will not be proper and
the digested food material will dry up in the intestine. As a result, there will be
irregular bowel movement, which will lead to constipation and discomfort. We
should eat lots of fruits and vegetables. They are rich in fibre which is necessary
for proper bowel movement.

> Excretory System

The excretory system helps in removing
wastes from our body. The process by
which wastes get removed from our body
is called excretion. Tne excretory system
is made up of a pair of kidneys, a pair of

ureters, a urinary bladder, and a urethra. Kidney
Kidneys Urine is formed inside the Ureter
kidneys. It contains harmful substances
that are formed inside our body and Uri
rinary
need to be excreted out. bladder |
Urefers Urine is transported from the Urethra
kidneys to the urinary bladder through a Human excretory system
pair of thin tubes called ureters. © sarin tunas. and Iver ore
Urinary bladder Urine is stored inside the
urinary bladder. organs.

Urethra Urine is released from our body through urethra.

> Healthy Habits Related to Digestion gms

Healthy eating habits lead to proper digestion of food. This makes us healthy and
strong. We must follow the healthy habits as listed below.

@ We must wash our hands properly before and after eating food.
@ Always eat from a clean plate.

® Eat a balanced diet. Avoid eating junk food.

@ Donot drink a lot of water while eating.

axe
e)
®
e) Include multigrain bread in our diet.
@)

good bowel movement.

> Healthy Habits Related to Excretion

Eat food rich in fibre, such as fruits and vegetables.
Avoid refined white flour. Eat chapattis made from whole-wheat flour.

Eat sprouted mung or gram seeds. They are rich in nutrients and help in

We should follow certain healthy habits so that waste material does

not remain in our body for a long time.
® Drinking plenty of water will help in
the proper removal of waste from
our body. We should drink at least
7-8 glasses of water every day.

We should never withhold
urination for a long time because
that might make us fall sick.

| SDG 3: Good Health and Well Being

(Ensure healthy lives and promote
well-being for all at all ages)

We can ensure good health and
well-being by eating a balanced diet
and taking care of our hygiene and

(TP)

Liquid waste materials should be SoM UIST se es ell @ctieh ss
to ensure proper sanitation of your

removed from our body at regular
; ; surroundings?
intervals, through urine. ‘ }

oS SS eee ewes S555 5555=

| Case Study |

Yamuna is one of the major rivers in northern India. Many industries and houses
_ are built near the bank of the river. Due to a lack of awareness, it is now considered }
: one of the most polluted rivers in the country. Consuming polluted water can have:
harmful effects on humans, like diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting, typhoid, etc. To avoid
polluting water bodies, waste should not be directly discarded in them; the use of
household chemicals and detergents should be controlled and more. To control

: water pollution in Yamuna, the government is taking steps such as building new
: sewer treatment plants, and repairing the existing sewer treatment plans.

Based on the above information, answer the following questions:

a. What is the impact of polluted water on humans’ digestive and excretory
sysiems?

b. What measures is the government of India taking to reduce water pollution?
c. What steps can we, as individuals, take to avoid water pollution?

S'
Sz

s G :

--] me .-.-------------------------------------------------------- @@ ---2 ,

- i g
: é

Names of organs of the digestive and excretory systems are given below. Write ‘DS’

_ for the organs of the digestive system and ‘ES’ for organs of the excretory system.

1. KidneyS —haeeeeteeteteeteeeeeees 2. RECTUM oe eeeeeetteeteeeeeee
3. Smallintestine ne eeeeeeeeeseeeeeees AL LIVEF i icaesaeeeeeeeseeeneeees
5. Ureters i hacaeaeeaeetentaeeaerees 6. AMUS ——inseeaeeteaeeeeneeaeaes
7. SOMACH —_hasaeauceeeeteeeeeeeeees '; a © (=) 0) ©
9. Urinary bladder on... ce eeseseceeeeee ees TO. MOUTA hae ceeeeseteeeeeere ees

®) The process by which food is broken down into a simpler form so that it can be
easily taken in or absorbed by our body is called digestion.

@) The organs of the digestive system are the mouth, food pipe, stomach, liver,
pancreas, small and large intestines, rectum, and anus.

® The excretory system is made up of a pair of kidneys, a pair of ureters, a urinary
bladder, and a urethra.

®) Healthy eating habits lead to good digestion of food and proper excretion. This
makes us healthy and strong.

ee

“eeeee*"  \-IRM ONO 8 2 22 2 20g gl Sh

sASTAyy, gehlting
SECTION | é ee § ¢ %s
(A) Choose the correct option.

1. In which of the following organs does digestion start in the human body?
a. Smallintestine 6. Blood vessels c. Stomach  d. Mouth

2. Which of the following organs helps in the absorption of nutrients in the body?

a. Smallintestine b. Stomach c. Liver d. Urethra

3. Which of the following organs helps in the absorption of water?
a. Large intestine b. Stomach c. Urethra d. Oesophagus

4. Which of the following organs store urine?
a. Urethra b. Kidneys c. Ureter d. Urinary bladder

#

gASTAW,
Uy
= %

‘
1
'

5. Which of the following is required for good bowel movement?
a. Saliva b. Fibre c. Nutrient — d. Enzyme

Assertion and Reasoning questions.
1. Assertion (A): Faeces are stored in the rectum for a short time.

Reason (R): Rectum is the last organ of the digestive system.
a. Both A and R are True b. Both A and R are False

c. Ais True and R is False d. Ais False and Ris True

2. Assertion (A): Urine is formed inside the kidneys.

' Reason (R): It contains useful substances that are formed inside our body. :
a. Both A and R are True b. Both A and R are False

c. Ais True and R is False d. Ais False and Ris True

: (© Choose the correct word to fill in the blank.
1. From the mouth, the chewed food reaches the stomach via the

aooonooocs cee (oesophagus/kidneys).
‘ 2. The liver secretes .............0 (saliva/digestive juices) that helps in the
t digestion of food.
3. TNE wee (excretory/circulatory) system helps in removing wastes
from our body.
' 4. Waste from our body is removed by the .........000 (kidneys/stomach).
5. Urine is formed inside the ............... (kidneys/ureters).
: (D> Match the following. |
Column A Column B
t 1. Churning a. Enzyme
2. Saliva b. Stomach }
3. Food pipe c. Roughage
4. Kidney d. Oesophagus
5. Fibre e. Urine
| SECTION II ly itty, tty

v=
ix
(Ey) Short answer questions. i=
1. Define digestion.
2. What is the role of tongue in the digestive process?

‘. 3. What happens to the undigested food? |

* .
teen ty

4. Define excretion.
5. Name two waste products of our body.

Fy Long answer questions.

1. Abhishek’s teacher takes their class to the science lab and they see a
model of human body there. The teacher asked Abhishek to identify the
various parts of the digestive system and explain their functions. Help
Abhishek in finding the answer.

2. Arpit is curious about how his body works. He learnt in his class that the
human body has a system to remove waste from the body, but he forgot
the correct order. Help Arpit by naming the organs of the excretory system
in sequence and explaining their function.

3. Swati was asked to give a class presentation on ‘Healthy Habits for
Digestion’. She wants to ensure that she covers all the points. Help Swati
by writing a short note on the topic.

See ee eee eee ee ee eee eee ee eee eee ee eee eee eee eee eee sees

Af UA,
a Sig (Au Tye

>)

@ The figure of the human digestive system with jumbled up labels are given
below. Unjumble and write the correct labels in the boxes given alongside.

GELARITNESTIEN |

LLAMS ITNESTIEN |—f.

oe ee ee ee ee eee eee,

Q} Look at the picture box, with organs related to the digestive or the

; excretory system. Identify them, and write their names and the system
to which they belong, in the boxes given below. (Write ‘DS’ for digestive
system and ‘ES’ for excretory system.)

ree y

—

eee ee

%
eee eee eee eee eee

a | b @ d. e.
4
OBJEC, (FE ery, eREATing
wane neon nne _ _ _ --. = _., ‘
Y= ‘
rea sens

(Ay Think about

Rakesh is suffering from constipation. His

doctor advised him to eat lots of fruits 2
and vegetables, along with at least eight —
glasses of water every day. Why did the ( )
doctor say so? Discuss. ~

Try out
1. Make a model of digestive or excretory system by using various items like
clay, Plaster-of-Paris, cotton, and cardboard.

2. Divide the whole class into groups and discuss about the healthy -
food habits related to digestion and excretion. (Before conducting (TP)
the discussion in the classroom, discuss with elders, make necessary
preparations like searching the Internet and making a list of important
points at home.)

3. Make a poster on the topic “How does water help us in digestion
and excretion?” (Take help from the Internet, if required). -

4, Proper digestion of food and removal of waste during excretion
is vital for your health and physical well-being. Elaborate. i

oo eee eee ee eee eee eee eee eee eee eee eee eee eee eee eens,

| Self-Assessment ;

Now that you have completed the chapter, score each of the following tasks
from 1 to 5 to indicate how well you can do them.

Score 5 =| can definitely do this.
Score 1 =| cannot do this yet.

* explain the process of digestive system.

e draw diagram of the human digestive system and
its different organs.

® explain the process of excretory system.

e draw diagram of the human excretory system and
its different organs.

® list the healthy habits related to digestion and
excretion.

oS EE EE ES SES SSeS eee See see eee ess

i
: ™-
1:
a)
SE Je
:@:
:-@:
a

of the parts that are labelled in the boxes alongside.

