We see different types of plants around us.
Some plants are big (trees) while others are
small (shrubs and herbs). There are certain
plants that have weak stems too and need
support (creepers and climbers). Plants are
important to maintain our environment and
the balance of nature.

(4) Plants in the Surroundings
SS and Environment

® Parts of a plant
® Root

@ Shoot ee
@ Food prepared by plants

@ Plant products we use

In Class 3 we have studied about the different types of plants. We know that
plants can be grouped as trees, shrubs, herbs, climbers, or creepers based on

their size and type of stem. Let us quickly recall.

Trees have a single,
woody stem called
trunk.

Climbers have weak
stems and need
support for climbing.

Shrubs havemany —_—_ Herbs have a single,

near the ground.

a

Creepers have weak stems
with heavy fruits that grow
along the ground.
> Parts of a Plant

The picture on the right shows the different
parts of a brinjal plant.A plant has two
main parts—the root and the shoot.

The shoot comprises the following parts:
Flower The flower forms the fruit.

Fruit Most fruits contain seeds. A fruit may
have one, few, or many seeds. Mango has
only one seed. Apple and orange have
few seeds. Papaya and watermelon have
many seeds.

Fruit

Leaf Leaves differ in shape and size. They Stem

are generally green in colour. The food for
the plant is prepared inside leaves in the

presence of sunlight, air, and water. Root

Stem The stem gives support to the plant.
It carries water and food to all other parts

of the plant. Brinjal plant

> Root
The part of the plant that usually grows below the soil is called the root.

Types of Roots

Roots are of two types: taproot and
fibrous root.

Taproot It consists of a thick main root
from which many thin roots grow. Plants
such as pea, carrot, and hibiscus have
taproots.

Fibrous root \t consists of many thin
and bushy roots instead of one main
root. Plants such as wheat, rice, and
grass have fibrous roots. Taproot Fibrous root

ae

Activity

1
1
i
1
y
*.

' (Adult supervision required)

Aim: To study the types of roots in plants

Materials required: Common roadside plants (4-5), grass, and a hand lens
| (Note: The plants should have intact roots.)

: Procedure:

: 1. Collect some common roadside plants and grass and wash them properly. The
roots should be clean and visible (as in Fig. A).

: 2. Pat them dry, and keep them over a white sheet of paper (Fig. B).
: 3. Now observe the roots of each plant with a hand lens.
: 4. Also, draw neat diagrams of their roots (Fig. C).

Fig. A Fig. B Fig. C

Observation: The herbs mostly have a main root with side branches.

: Grass does not have a main root, and all roots originate directly from the base of
| the stem.

Conclusion: Herbs mostly have taproots. Grass has fibrous roots.

Functions of Roots

The main functions of roots are
as follows:

® Roots help the plant stay fixed
in the soil.

® Roots absorb water and
minerals from the soil. Water
and minerals help the plant to
prepare its food.

® Roots of plants such as carrot,
turnip, radish, and beetroot are thick and fleshy because food prepared by
the plants is stored in them. We eat these roots as vegetables.

Beetroot Carrot Radish

Roots that store food

Aim: To study the function of roots in plants

' Materials required: Two potted plants: one with intact
' roots and the other with roots cut out, and water

Procedure: Water both the plants regularly.
Observation: After a few days, you will see that the
: plant that has roots (Fig. A) has grown up, but leaves
' of the plant that has no roots (Fig. B) have withered,
| and the plant is almost dead. Fig. A Fig. B

Conclusion: Water could not reach various parts of the plant due to the absence
of roots (Fig. B). So, the plant almost died.
_ Roots absorb water and minerals from the soil.

Se eee ee eee ee eee ee eee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee eee ee eee eee ee eee ee eee eee eee ee

PEM BEG, sRSTAay
¥ % = %

2 aa
ep ges: €s _ gq
i ay
' a
i i

' Fill in the blanks with a suitable word.

]. Plants are important fo maintain the ....... es ON INE we Of Nature.
2. The Stem QIVES ...........:ceeeeees to the plant.
— 3. Rice plants have ...... ee roots.
‘. 4. Roots of carrots Oe ..... eee as they store .........::::ee in them.

> Shoot

The part of a plant that usually grows above the
soil is called the shoot. Tne shoot bears the stem,
leaves, flowers, and fruits.

Stem

The stem is the main
part of the shoot

on which branches,
leaves, flowers, and fruits grow. Trees such as banyan
and mango have thick, woody, and strong stems
called trunks.

Banyan tree

Grapevines and bean plants have weak stems that
need the support of other plants, walls, or sticks.

ase

Grapevine on a support
Functions of Stem
The main functions of a stem are
as follows:

@ The stem carries water and minerals
from the roots to the leaves for
making food.

It transports food from the leaves to
the other parts of the plant.

@ Strong stems provide support to the
plants to stand upright. Sugar cane

® Stems of some plants are swollen as Stems that store food
they store food. Plants such as sugar
cane, potato, onion, and ginger store food in their stems. These stems are
eaten as food.

Potato

Parts of a Leaf seat blade Leaf stalk

Leaves are an important part of plants as
they manufacture food for the plants. Leaves
appear green due to the presence of a
green substance, called chlorophyll, which
helps them to absorb sunlight.

Stomata

Leaf blade The fiat part of the leaf is known
as the leaf blade or lamina. Some leaves

Vein
Midrib

have broad leaf blades, while others have Parts of a leaf
narrow ones.

Midrib A tube-like structure (vein) that
runs down the centre of a leaf is called the
midvein or midrib. It is the main vein of the
leaf. Many side veins arise from the midrib.
Both the midrib and the side veins help in
the transportation of water, minerals, and
prepared food through them.

Leaf stalk The part that atlaches the leaf to
a branch ora stem is called the leaf stalk.
Mango leaf It is also called petiole.

Stomata The undersurface of most leaves, when seen through a hand lens,
shows several tiny openings all over the surface. These openings are called
stomata (singular. stoma).

Variation in Leaves Different plants have different kinds of leaves. They differ

in shapes and sizes. Mostly, leaves are green, but their shades may vary. The
leaves of some plants, like croton and maple, are of different colours, like yellow
or red, with little patches of green.

Hy Og OOM ved

Different shapes of leaves

Functions of the Leaf
A leaf generally performs the following functions:

e) It prepares food using water,
minerals, carbon dioxide, sunlight,
and chlorophyll. Leaf is also known

as the kitchen of a plant as it is Leaves take in
the place where the food for a carbon dioxide
; from air with the Leaves absorb
plant is prepared. help of stomata. sunlight with the
@ Insome plants, it stores extra food. help of chlorophyll

present in the

@ Leaves have stomata that help leaves

a plant to take in carbon dioxide
and give out oxygen during
photosynthesis.

Photosynthesis
The process by which green plants
prepare their own food using carbon
dioxide, water, and minerals in the minerals from soil. The

. absorbed water and minerals
presence of sunlight and chlorophyll are carried by the stem to the
is called photosynthesis. leaves.

Roots absorb water and

Photosynthesis

ene
ore oss ce

(Adult supervision required)
Aim: To demonstrate the presence of starch in a leaf

Materials required: A potted plant, beaker, tripod stand, burner, iodine solution,
woter, petri dish, a dropper, and methylated spirit

Procedure:

1. Keep the potted plant in a dark room for 2 or 3 days, to remove the starch from
the leaves (Fig. A).

2. Now place the plant in sunlight for a day (Fig. B).

3. Remove a leaf from the plant, and dip it in boiling water for a minute (Fig. C).

4. Transfer the leaf to a test tube containing methylated spirit. Put this test tube in a
beaker filled with water.

5. Place the beaker on the tripod stand over the burner. Boil the water (Fig. D).
(Note: We cannot boil the test tube directly on fire, as it is highly dangerous
because methylated spirit catches fire when directly heated).

6. Remove the leaf from the test tube and place it in hot water to soften it (Fig. E).

7. Now place the leaf in the petri dish and add a few drops of iodine solution on it
using a dropper (Fig. F).

Methylated

spirit i |” P

Fig. A Fig. B Fig. C Fig. D

(a

*—— Hot water Blue-black
P| <> = ee of leaf
Fig. E Fig. F

Observation: The leaf turns blue-black in colour.

Conclusion: The change in colour of the leaf confirms the presence of starch
(prepared during photosynthesis).

This is Known as the iodine test for starch.

_ Activity wy e

(Adult supervision required)

: Aim: To show that green leaves need sunlight to prepare food

Materials required: A potted plant, beaker, tripod stand, burner, iodine solution,

water, petri dish, and methylated spirit

Procedure:

1. Keep a healthy potted plant inside a dark room for two or three days. Water the
plant regularly (Fig. A).

| a ee

Fig. A Fig. B Fig. C Fig. D Fig. E

‘| “ft wa a § ~~

N

Remove a leaf from the plant, and dip it in boiling water for a minute (Fig. B).

3. Transfer the leaf to a test tube containing methylated spirit. Put this test tube in a
beaker filled with water.

4. Place the beaker over the burner flame. Boil the water until the leaf becomes
colourless (Fig. C). (Note: We cannot boil the test tube directly on fire, as it is highly
dangerous because methylated spirit catches fire when directly heated).

5. Now, take the leaf out and wash it with cold water (Fig. D). Place it in a petri dish.
Add a few drops of iodine solution on the leaf using the dropper (Fig. E).

Observation: The colour of the leaf does not change.

Conclusion: When the plant was kept inside the dark room for 2 or 3 days, all its starch

(food stored inside its leaves) gets used up. So, when a drop of iodine solution was

added to it, the colour of the leaf did not change, as there was no starch present

inside the leaf. Moreover, there was no photosynthesis as there was no sunlight.

Hibiscus plant is a shrub. Its flowers are large, attractive, and generally red in colour.

' Suppose, there are two pots (A and B), both containing hibiscus plants. The plant

in Pot A has its root intact while the plant in Pot B has no roots.
Based on the above information, answer the following questions:
a. If we water both the pots, what will happen:
i. to the plant in Pot A ii. to the plant in Pot B
lb. Give reasons for your answer.

%

‘ Questions }

sce cee ee cenaa*

Write T for True and F for False.

1. Grapevine has a weak stem.
' 2. Mango leaf has a broader leaf blade as compared to banana leaf.
3. Through the stomata of leaf, carbon dioxide is taken in for photosynthesis.
4. lodine test is used to test for the presence of carbon dioxide inside a leaf.
: 5. Starch turns blue-black in the presence of iodine in a leaf.

errr errr reer rere eee reer eee reer errr re eee) eee eer rete ree eee eT

Transpiration

Transpiration is the process by which plants release water in the form of water
vapour through its stomatal openings (present on the surface of the leaves).
Large amounts of water evaporate from the surface of the plant through
transpiration. This has a cooling effect on plants.

itn, epENTiy,

Leann? SKS
Aim: To demonstrate transpiration in plants

' Materials required: A wellwatered medium-sized potted plant (that should have
‘ at least two twigs), two transparent polythene bags, and two threads for tying

i Procedure:

: ]. Remove all the leaves of one twig while = oz meee
leave the second twig as such. 1. -™ / :
| 2. Cover these twigs with separate Poly bs '
' polythene bags. \ a { o '
_ 3. Tie them securely with thread at the Pe y a Branch}
- base of the twig as shown in the picture / \ with leaves |
‘alongside. _ Branch Polythene
' 4. Keep the plant in sunlight for an pithout leaves
i hour or two. 1

Observation: Drops of water can be seen on the inside of the polythene bag that
covered the twig with leaves intact. No water drops can be seen on the inside of
the polythene bag that covered the twig with no leaves.

Conclusion: This shows that water vapour is released through the stomata of
leaves during transpiration. These water drops are condensed water vapour. !

> Food Prepared By Plants

The food prepared by plants by the process
of photosynthesis is glucose (sugar).

Cabbage stores extra

A plant uses the food prepared by it for its jes
growth and to get energy for carrying out food in its leaves.

activities such as photosynthesis.
A plant does not use all the food that it ae
makes. Extra food is stored in the form of Beetroot stores

starch. Some plants store extra food as extrafoodin Sugar cane stores extra

, . . its roots. f ini m.
starch in their roots, stems, leaves, or fruits. ood in its ste
ely Petey,

(Adult supervision required)
' Aim: To test the presence of starch in potato

Materials required: A slice of potato, a dropper, and
iodine solution

Procedure:

Add a few drops of iodine solution over a slice of potato
using dropper.

Observation: The slice of potato turns blue-black.
' Conclusion: This shows that potato contains starch. !

> Plant Products We Use

Plants are very useful to us. Many things that we use
in our daily life are obtained from plants.

Many food items we eat are obtained from plants.
We get cereals, pulses, vegetables, fruits, nuts, oils,
and spices from plants. We also get tea, coffee,
sugar, and cocoa beans from plants.

Fruits and vegetables

We get oil from plants such as coconut,
sandalwood, and neem which is used to make soaps and shampoos.
We use plants such as tulsi, neem, ginger, and eucalyptus to make medicines.

ee
Know Your SDGs_

a
1

Yoana eS

SDG 12: Responsible
Consumption and Production

(Ensure sustainable consumption

Tea leaves Oil and spices and production patterns)
Paper is made from the wood
of trees. A large number of trees
= are cut down every year to make
- a paper. This leads to environmental
= Sa — problems. Therefore, we should
Coffee beans Man twisting coir to avoid wastage of paper in order to
make ropes save trees. Paper can be recycled

to make products like facial tissue,
toilet paper, tissue paper, paper
bag, and paper towel.

x 4
Fy

i
'
i
i
'
1
L)
1
a
L)
a
a
4
4
i
1
1
i
1
1
i
i
1
i
i
1
i
t
1
1
LJ
1
1
LJ
1
i
1
i
i
i
a
i
i
a
i

26

eS SS ee ee ee eee

ersssecne
WSS Se ee eee ee See eee eee”

int

Neemleaves Spoons made from bamboo

Plants such as cotton, jute, sun hemp, flax, and coconut give us fibre, which are
used to make clothes, bags, baskets, and carpets.

Coir is obtained from the outer covering of the
coconut fruit, which is mainly used to make ropes.
Bamboo is used to make paper. Plants such as teak,
sal, sheesham, pine, and deodar give us timber to
build furniture, doors, and windows.

We also get other materials such as cork, rubber,
and gum from plants.

=

v

fi

Thus, plants are very
important for us.Apart from | The baobab tree found in Africa can store 1,000 to ©

“

the products that we get ' 120,000 litres of water in its swollen trunk. Around

from plants, they give us - 2000 different types of plants are used by humans '
oxygen for breathing. They - to make food. An average size tree can provide
bind the soil and prevent it | ¢nough wood to make 170,100 pencils.

from being washed away
by rain and floods. They form the habitat for many insects, birds, and other
organisms. So we should take care of plants.

oie
Rubber mat

Collection of milky
liquid from rubbertree | Rubber shoes Gum Acacia tree

TECH LIFE

953

Divide the class into groups, and suggest measures on how we can ees ous
reduce the consumption of paper. You can search the Internet and make a list
_ before the discussion.

Write the uses of the given plants. }
Rank @%0 010) 916) (== a

]

ae O70) 10) a ©) (0 | 0)

x Fa 10] 80) 010.0) | (~:~ Hi
4, SNEESNAM TEC ct EEE EERE EEE EEE EEE Ene ,
Sicilian Se ee ee eee, se
oF (©) 4 ©) (6 | a | ;

Root is the part of the plant that grows below the soil.

@)
® The taproot has a thick main root from which many thin roots grow.

e) The fibrous root has many thin and bushy roots instead of one main root.
es) The stem bears leaves, flowers, and fruits.

@)

The leaf manufactures food for the plant.The main parts of a leaf are leaf blade, »
midrib, leaf stalk, and stomata.

@ A leaf prepares food through photosynthesis.

exe
e) Photosynthesis is the process by which green plants prepare their own food. Plants }
use carbon dioxide, water, minerals, sunlight, and chlorophyll to prepare food. ;

e) Transpiration is the process by which plants release water in the form of water :
vapour through the pores present on the surface of the leaves.

®) The food prepared by plants by the process of photosynihesis is glucose (sugar). !

Seeeet,

eee eee ee

Beenett

Exercises “e wee

gens, sy, ering '

SECTION | cy s e- &
(Ay Choose the correct option.
To Roca absorbs water and minerals from the soil. '

a. Leaf b. Stem c. Root d. Flower '

2. A vicceeeeeeeeees is also known as the kitchen of a plant.

a. root b. stomata c. flower d. leaf '

3. Chlorophyll helps tO ADSOrb ..........:ccceeeeseeeeeeee ees

a. oxygen b. carbon dioxide a wwinkghe d. sunlight

4. The flat part of a leaf is called .......... eee

a. vein b. midrib c. leaf Lo d. leaf stalk

5. Tiny pores on leaves are Called ...........ccccceeeeeeeeeeeees .

a. veins b. leaf stalk c. stomata d. midrib '
(eee is the food prepared by plants by the process of
photosynthesis.

a. Glucose b. Oxygen c. Chlorophyll d. Minerals '

7. Apotato plant stores extra food in its .............5. . '

a. stomata b. leaves c. roots d. stem
Assertion and Reasoning questions. |
1. Assertion (A): Stem helps in the transportation of water and minerals in

the plant.

Reason (R): It transports water and minerals from the leaves to the other t

parts of the plant.

a. Both A and R are True b. Both A and R are False '

c. Ais True and R is False d. Ais False and R is True ;

eee a

2. Assertion (A): Plants take in carbon dioxide through stomata during
photosynthesis.
Reason (R): Plants prepare their own food through photosynthesis.
a. Both A and R are True b. Both A and R are False

c. AisTrue and Ris False d. Ais False and Ris True
Choose the correct word to fill in the blank.
Ve RRB oconsc000 Mgooaoceaconn (lap/Fibrous) roots have a thick main root.
2. Aplant uses the food prepared by it for its ..........:ceecsereeeees (growth/decay).
3. Spinach stores fO0d iN itS wo. eee eee (leaf/flower).
A, TING viieeeeceecteeeeeeeneeeeen ees (midrib/leaf stalk) is the main vein of the leaf.
Sh US toc nnconanbononno MAREE oo (petiole/stomata) attaches the leaf to the stem.
Name the following.
1. Many thin, bushy roots instead of one MAIN root Ow... eects

2. Agreen substance present in leaves, which
helpsthemitoabsorb sunlight ee eet tte eteettete nee eeea eras

3. Leavestakeinthis gas from Gir eaeeeeteett tet eteetetea eens
4. In plants, the extra food is stored inthis form ose eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee
5. Stemofbanyanand mango tree ll iaeeeeeeeteteeeetteeeetaeeen eres

SECTION Il Y=
(E> Short answer questions.

1. Name one plant that has taproot.

Name one plant that has fibrous root.

Name one root that we eat as a vegetable.

What are stomata? How do they help a plant?
What are the functions of a leaf?

Name two plants that we use to make medicines.
What is transpiration?

NOOR WN

Long answer questions.

1. Shikha went to the supermarket with her mother. There she saw carrots
and radishes. She asked her mother which parts of the plant they were.
Help her by writing a short note on them.

2. Raman, a village boy, wanted to know from his grandfather, a farmer,
about the main function of the stem. Write what his grandfather may
have answered.

3. Prateek’s Science teacher gave an assignment on the topic,
photosynthesis. Help him by explaining the process of photosynthesis with
the help of a labelled diagram.

4. Draw the diagram of a leaf and label its parts.

5. Rohan went to the Delhi Trade Fair, where he saw different products
obtained from plants. Make a note about the products he might have
seen there.

 — wees eeee eee eseeesseesesss a?

1} Different plants are shown below. Observe the type of roots they have. Write
‘TR’ for taproot and ‘FR’ for fibrous root, in the boxes provided beneath them.

a.

@ Look at the given picture of a leaf, and an enlarged

portion of it. Label the parts of the leaf and answer
the following questions.

a. Write the function of a leaf.

b. Why does a leaf appear green?

d. What are the two types of leaf blades? 3

oe ee ee ee eee ee eee

®
=
a>
2
Q
=
2.
a>
d
3
2.
=)
<
O.
3
Q
2.
Q
QD
Q
Q
=
=)
Q
=
>]
Q
n
oe)

LIFE geting, eREATNg

| O _ = “©
ki v=

‘Ay Think about

1. If there are no stomata on the leaf, write what will happen to the plant?
[Hint What is the role of stomata?]

2. If we securely tie a plastic bag around a portion of a twig having leaves,
water droplets appear on the inner surface of the plastic bag. Can you
explain why?

[Hint: The phenomenon is due to a process that takes place in the leaf. ]

Try out

]. Perform the following activity to make your own paper bag.

Aim: To make a paper bag

Materials required: A newspaper/chart paper, gum, and a decorative

thick thread (to make the handle)

Procedure:

a. Take a newspaper or a chart paper and overlap the
lengthwise margins of the newspaper. Paste the margins
with glue (Fig. A).

(3)
\

b. Fold the lower side (Fig. B) and paste it so
that it is sealed.

c. Fold the upper border towards inside (Fig. C).
You can put a rectangular chart paper inside
and paste the margin. It will make the bag sturdy.

d. Make two holes on the upper border pass a
thread through it, and tie it. Your one handle
is ready. Repeat it for the other handle of

} the bag (Fig. D).

ee ee ee ee ee ee eee ee ee eee eee eee eee

e. Your bag is ready. You can now paint and decorate the bag, fo make
it more attractive.

f. You can use your paper bag to carry school items that are not that
heavy like your Science Scrapbook or your Project File.

2. Visit a garden and click pictures of various plants. Take a print and paste
them in your Science Scrapbook. Write this activity in a tabular form as
given below. Categorise plants into herbs, shrubs, and trees. Write 2-3 lines
related to them. Also, draw their leaves and their uses, if any.

Picture Herb/Shrub/Tree Drawitsleaf Information Use, if any

3. Create a herbal nursery in your balcony, backyard, or garden. You
can plant medicinal plants like tulsi, mint, and ginger in small pots.
Likewise, plants like coriander, garlic, oregano, basil, and thyme can
also be planted in them. Search the Internet and find out how these
plants can be used to add flavour to our food. You have already learnt
how to grow a potted plant in Class 3. Use manure, keep them preferably
in sunlight, and water them as required.

Self-Assessment

y
* +

Now that you have completed the chapter, score each of the following tasks from
: 1 to 5 to indicate how well you can do them.

_ Score 5 =! can definitely do this.
_ Score 1 =! cannot do this yet.

- © draw, label, and explain the different parts of a plant.

identify the root and its types, and list its functions.

identify the stem and list its functions.

list the different types of food prepared by plants.

® name and draw the different products we get from plants.

B
+5
ee
6:
‘a

oS ee ee ee eee eee eee eee eee eee

Details about the activity

a7
Fig. B
a
oy
va
¥
f
Fig. C
=
Fig. F

Activity

about each activity.

