Nouns |:
Compound Nouns

1

‘ Revision

You already know that there are two main kinds of nouns: common and proper.

A common noun is a general name that is given to all things, places, animals or
persons of one kind: book, continent, country, river, dog, girl, boy, city, etc.

A proper noun is a special name given to a particular thing, place, animal or person:
Asia, Canada, Nile, Meera, Salim, Karachi, Taj Mahal, Victoria Memorial, Red Fort, etc.

X coltective Nouns

Collective nouns are a special kind of common and proper nouns.
A common or proper noun that is the name of a collection or group of similar things or

persons is known as a collective noun: crowd, committee, herd, United Nations, etc.

Sometimes, the persons, animals or things making up the collection or group are
mentioned:

(a) “The Golden Treasury’ is a well-known anthology of poems.

(b) Mother has lost her bunch of keys.

Only the underlined nouns are collective nouns, the nouns printed in bold letters
are common nouns.

Some collective nouns are usually

used by themselves:
(c) He bought a lot of furniture

for his new house. N ]
(d) My family will soon move

to Mumbai.
A Pick out the proper and common nouns from the following sentences and state
which of the common nouns are collective:

1. A herd of cows was grazing in the field.
There was a pile of books on the table.
All living creatures need food to survive.

Pe YN

The magician turned a bunch of keys into
a pigeon.
The Ganga is a river sacred to Indians.

We could see crowds of people standing in the streets.
The crew of the sinking ship refused to leave the Captain behind.
The class wanted Reema to be their monitor.

SC APNnNsa gu

In winter, flocks of birds come to this lake.
10. Africa is the second largest continent.
11. The horse could not pull that cart full
of sand.
12. Sanjay has joined a company of actors.

13. This album has five CDs of popular songs.

14. The two teams went in separate buses to
the stadium.

15. We saw many groups of pilgrims camping by the river.

KX compound Nouns or Compounds

Some common and proper nouns are made up of more than one word.
They are known as compound nouns or simply compounds: newspaper
(news + paper), ashtray (ash + tray), plaything, keyboard, brother-in-law,
air conditioner, Jama Masjid, White House, etc.

You should note carefully:

There is no rule as to how the different words making up a

compound noun should be written. In some cases, such a noun of the word

compound is

‘a mixture of
more than
one thing’.

is written as:
¢ one word, like spoonful, hardback, waterproof.
* as separate words, like factory worker, travel guide, hard copy.

e with a hyphen or hyphens, like father-in-law, runner-up.

Some of the underlined nouns are compound nouns. Pick them out and say
whether they are proper or common:

BPwnrP

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

20.

. My grandparents live in New Delhi.
. Even grown-ups like to read fairy tales.

My penfriend lives in a town in South Africa.
The postman put all the letters in the letter box.

The woodpecker is a bird with a strong bill and stiff tail.
Many great men have used the famous
library of the British Museum in London.

Jayant likes to watch westerns with

cowboys and plenty of gunfights and.
punch-ups.
Please do not park your cars in

the driveway.
Reena suffers from hay fever and

frequent headaches.

Paperbacks cost much less than hardbacks, but they are not so durable.
A new pop group is going to play at the local dance hall.

The crown jewels of the Queen of England are kept in the Tower of
London.

Chewing gum is not a modern invention; men were chewing gum even
5,000 years ago.

The spaceship crashed on an unknown planet in the Milky Way.

The students will be given their timetable soon.
The x-rays must be given to the doctor in the operation theatre.

We have an open-air stage in

our school.

Grandfather was sitting in his
armchair and reading a magazine.
Mother is doing her spring clean and

we have been asked to stay away.
All passengers were asked to fasten
their seat belts, and switch off their
laptops and cell phones.

