aY lg

~
=e

p ad 9 Nouns Il: Countable and

) Uncountable

& revision

You know that a noun which refers to one thing or person is said to be in the singular
number, and when a noun refers to more than one thing or person of the same kind, it
is said to be in the plural number.
1. Most common nouns, therefore, have a singular form and a plural form.
2. Proper nouns are not usually used in the plural. You will learn the use of the
plural forms of proper nouns in higher classes.
3. Some nouns have the same form for both the plural and
the singular:
A deer is a gentle animal.
I have seen many deer when I went to the Sunderbans.
Some such nouns are sheep, aircraft, furniture, Chinese.

A State the number of each of the underlined nouns:
Man must earn his bread by the sweat of his brow.

The Trojan War lasted for ten years.

The children have gone to the zoo.

Some of the women had babies in their arms.
Geese cackle and donkeys bray.

My uncle’s library is full of books.

NAOT PF ON PD

You must learn how to arrange knives, forks
and spoons on a table.

8. As darkness fell, the hunters could hear the
wolves howling.

9. We had only boiled potatoes and rice for dinner.

10. It was so hot that people were using their handkerchiefs as fans.

K More about Singular and Plural Nouns

1.
2.
3.

Some nouns are always treated as plural, e.g. cattle, police.
The noun clothes (= dress; the plural of cloth is cloths) has no singular form.

Some nouns are always used in the plural, for they are the names of things
that are made up of two parts that are joined together: shorts, trousers, pyjamas,
glasses, jeans, binoculars, scissors, pants, spectacles.

The plural forms of some nouns sometimes have meanings different from those
of their singular forms:

arm = a limb of the body

arms = weapons

manner = the way something is done/happens
manners = behaviour

green = the name of a colour

greens = vegetables

new = something that did not exist before
news = newly received or noteworthy information

Though the names of certain diseases, subjects of study or sports have a plural
form, they are treated as singular:
mathematics, physics, measles, mumps, diabetes, economics, cards, darts, billiards

X countable and Uncountable Nouns

In the case of some common nouns, we can clearly mention how many of the same
kind of thing or person we are talking about:

two men thirty sheep five thousand rupees
Such nouns are known as countable nouns.

But there are some common nouns which are the names of things or persons that

cannot be counted, like water, milk, weather, music, youth, etc. We cannot say, ‘I want

one water’ or ‘Let me have two milk’.

Such nouns are known as uncountable nouns.

Note the difference between (i) a common noun that has the same form for both the

singular and the plural, and (ii) an uncountable noun.

PO PT ON)
In the case of (i), we can say: one sheep

one aircraft

two sheep
two aircraft
But in the case of (ii), we cannot use a definite number before the noun, we cannot

say: one water two water
one milk two milk
To sum up:

Nouns that are the names of things, people, etc. which can be
counted are known as countable nouns.

They usually have singular and plural forms.

Nouns that are the names of things, people, etc. which cannot
be counted are known as uncountable nouns.

Most of them do not have plural forms and we cannot use definite numbers

before them.
Given below is a list of some commonly used uncountable nouns:

: advice coffee equipment help music silence )
anger courage fear ice oil snow
baggage cream. food knowledge peace sugar
beauty dust fun love pity tea
bread. earth furniture luck pride water
coal energy health magic sand weather
=

B State whether the underlined nouns are countable or uncountable:

1. The doctor has asked Raman to keep away from both salt and sugar.

Bina loves to play basketball.

He ate his soup with a spoon.

Our cook uses too much oil and butter in his cooking.

The man spent all his money on books and lived happily in poverty.

John bought a new car and took us all for a ride.

NA oF FP & N

I am very fond of rice and have it at every meal.

8. Drinking too much coffee or tea is not good for
your health.

9. No living being can survive without air.
10. He does not like bread or butter.

11. He put some toothpaste on his brush and walked into
the bathroom.

12. Oil and water do not mix easily.

13. Ramen met with an accident and there was blood all over his clothes.

14. Luck was on his side and he won a lot of prizes at the fair.

15. There was no electricity in the town :

because of the floods.

16. The weather was fine and we spent the
day sitting in the garden.

17. When you listen to good music, you
lose all sense of time.

18. He had eggs and toast for breakfast,
meat at lunch and milk at bedtime.

19. There was no space in the drawing room and so they put the television set
in the bedroom.

20. The sand on the beach was clean and golden in colour.

K uncountable Nouns: Quantity

In completing the above exercise, you must have noticed that:

1. Sometimes we use a word or words with some uncountable nouns to give an
idea of quantity, that is, how much:
no electricity some toothpaste all his money too much coffee
You must remember that these words give us only an idea of quantity —litle,
some, much—but not the exact number or count.

2. With some uncountable nouns, we can use a word or words to give an idea of

quality (of what kind):
badluck foul weather — good tea

PO POT ON)
3. The article the can be used with both countable and uncountable nouns:
Countable: The boy worked very hard to finish the task
in time.
The boys worked very hard to finish the
tasks in time.

Uncountable: The water in the kettle was boiling.
4, The articles a or an, however, can be used only with countable nouns, because in

such cases, 4 or an means ‘one’ which is a definite number:

We saw a man walking down the road.

The children were thrilled when they were taken for a ride on an elephant.

Cc Choose the correct forms of the words from those given in brackets and rewrite
the following sentences:

1. Little (baby, babies) usually drink (milk, milks).
2. Seeing so much (blood, bloods), Rita fainted.

3. The (van, vans) were waiting to collect the (luggage, luggages) of
the passengers.

4. You must produce a letter from your parent to explain your frequent
(absence, absences).

5. [hate (noise, noises) and so do not like loud (music, musics).

6. People believe that if you drink the (water, waters) of this river, you will
never suffer from any (illness, illnesses).

7. Can you lend me some (book, books) to read? I have so much spare (time,
times) that I do not know what to do.

8. Thank you for all the (help, helps)

you gave me when I was in ) f
(trouble, troubles). be

9. Rita has cut her (hair, hairs) ae) i)
very short.
10. The children had great (fun, funs)
watching the puppet show.

11. John’s friends wished him good
(luck, lucks) in his new business.

12. There is plenty of (food, foods) in the fridge and you can eat as much as you
like.

13. Rahul spent all his (energy, energies) at the gymnasium and had none left for
his (study, studies).

14. The man said that (poverty, poverties) had made him steal the (money,
moneys).

15. In winter, the streets of this city are covered with (snow, snows).

D Use the words in the box below to fill in the blanks given before the underlined
uncountable nouns to give an idea of quantity or quality:

[ all any © little _—_lot much | no | some |

1. Did you drink ............0. milk today?
2. HOW oessssssesseeees rice did he eat at lunch?
3. She had SO ......... time to study

during the day that she had to stay up
most of the night, reading and writing.
4. My uncle likes to drink coffee with a

seseaeseseeestees of sugar in it.
5. Would you like to listen to... music?
6. There is a saying that ................ news is good news.
7. The parents were very anxious, for they had received ...........0+ information

regarding their son.
8. Would you like .............0 bread with your
mutton stew?
QD. resesssesesneees his luggage was stolen and he had
no clothes to wear the next day.
10. Though he is very rich, he refuses to pay
eseeeeeseeteeees part of the money he owes me.

