1.

Note that all nouns, whether common or proper, are
replaced with he, she, it or they, depending on whether
the gender of the noun you want to replace with a
pronoun is masculine, feminine, common or neuter and
whether the noun is singular or plural in number.

So, when you replace a noun with a pronoun, you must

3 Pronouns |: General

A pronoun is a word that is used instead of a noun that
has already been mentioned or is already known.

The
word
pronoun
comes from
pro (Latin
‘pro’ = for)
+noun.

look at:

(i)

(ii)

the gender of the noun

A noun of the masculine gender must be replaced with he.

A noun of the feminine gender must be replaced with she.

A noun of the neuter gender is usually replaced with it.

A noun of the common gender may be replaced with he/she as required.

the number of the noun to be replaced —singular or plural

A singular noun must be replaced with a singular pronoun—he/she/it.
A plural noun must be replaced with a plural pronoun— they.

(a) Jeet said that Jeet had finished reading the book Jeet had bought last week.
(b) Salim and Karan were going home when Salim and Karan met Jeet.

The above sentences may be rewritten by using pronouns:
(c) Jeet said that he had finished reading the book he had bought last week.
(d) Salim and Karan were going home when they met Jeet.

bo susie So
2. Remember that since a pronoun is used instead of a noun that has already
been mentioned or is already known, we must be careful in using a pronoun.
Otherwise, there may be confusion.

For example:
(e) Jeet told Salim that he had not been chosen to play for the school team.
Usually, when a pronoun is used instead of a noun, the pronoun refers to the
noun last mentioned. So, in (e) he should refer to Salim. But, even then, some
confusion remains, for we are not sure who he refers to: Jeet or Salim.
You must not write sentences like this. Where necessary, you must use a noun
again to make it absolutely clear as to what you want to say. So, depending on
who he refers to in (e), the sentence should read:
(f) Jeet told Salim that Jeet had not been chosen to play for the school team.

or
(g) Jeet told Salim that Salim had not been chosen to play for the school team.

3. When we want to use a pronoun instead of a noun in a sentence, we sometimes
have to replace not only the noun, but other words as well:
(h) Vinod took out his book and started reading the book.

When we rewrite the sentence using a pronoun, we get:
(i) Vinod took out his book and started reading it.

The pronoun it has replaced two words: the book, that is, not only a noun (book),
but also the definite article, the.

Take another example:
(j) Once Hari and Govinda were great friends, but now Hari
and Govinda do not speak to each other.

Rewritten, this sentence becomes:
(k) Once Hari and Govinda were great friends, but now they
do not speak to each other.

The pronoun they has replaced three words: Hari and
Govinda, that is, two proper nouns (Hari, Govinda) and the conjunction, and.

It is clear, therefore, that sometimes in replacing nouns with pronouns, we have
to leave out other words as well. A sentence thus becomes simpler and shorter.

Rewrite each of the following sentences, replacing a noun with a pronoun wherever
possible. One has been done for you.

1. The man looked at me and the man smiled.
The man looked at me and he smiled.

2. Rima looked at the hill in the distance. Rima wanted
to climb the hill.

3. The teacher told her students that the students must
listen carefully to what the teacher told the students.

4. Sohrab was Rustum’s son, but Sohrab and Rustum had
never met.

5. Jim wanted to play and so Jim looked for his bat and ball.

6. When Jim was walking down the road, a boy waved to Jim from the other side
of the road, but Jim could not remember where Jim had met that
boy before.

7. Arjun must not tease the dog, because the dog might bite Arjun.

8. Gaurav and Saurav are brothers. Gaurav and Saurav fight with each other all
the time.

9. Once upon a time, a man and his wife lived near the sea. The man and his wife
were very poor. The man went out fishing in the sea every day, but the man
seldom caught any fish.

10. The bird flew to its nest. The bird wanted to feed its young.

11. Ali Baba followed the robbers to the cave. Ali Baba saw the robbers enter
the cave. Ali Baba knew that the robbers hid all that the robbers had stolen in
the cave.

12. The apples on the tree were ripe. Jaya picked one and
took a bite, but Jaya found the apple very sour.

13. The passengers of the train complained that the train
always ran late and so, the passengers had decided
that the passengers would write a letter to the
newspapers about it.

14. The crowd shouted and booed. The crowd wanted
the home team to win.

15. Ravi was sleeping. Karan came and woke Ravi up.
Karan and Ravi went out to play.
